*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

IA No. 4650/2007 in CS(OS) No. 496/2007
Judgment reserved on: May 28, 2007
Judgment delivered on: July 23, 2007

%

M/s. Govardhan Motels & Restaurants
..... Plaintiff
Through:
Mr. S.K. Bansal with
Mr. Pankaj Kumar, Advocates
versus
I. Subramanyam & Anr.
Through:

CORAM:

..... Defendant
Mr. Jayant Bhushan, Sr.Advocate
with Mr. Rama Arora, Advocate

HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

VIPIN SANGHI, J
1.

By this order, I propose to dispose of the aforesaid

application filed by the defendant no. 2 under Sections 20 and 21 of
the Code of Civil Procedure and Section 134 of the Trade Marks Act,
challenging the territorial jurisdiction of this court to entertain the
present suit against the defendants.
2.

The plaintiff has filed the present suit alleging infringement

IA No. 4650/2007 in CS(OS) No. 496/2007

Page 1 of 12

of trade mark and copyright by the defendants in its mark
“Govardhan” which is used by the plaintiff in relation to its business of
running vegetarian restaurants.

It is stated that since 1999 the

plaintiff has adopted and is using the trade mark “Govardhan” by itself
along with the stylised letter 'G'.

It is claimed that the word/mark

“Govardhan” per se and stylised form in which the letter 'G' is
adopted, separately as well as collectively are the essential and
distinguishing feature of the mark “Govardhan”. The plaintiff also
claims copyright in the manner of depiction on the said mark
“Govardhan”.

This mark is used by the plaintiff on its displays,

invoices, stationery, napkins, cutlery, crockery both disposable and
otherwise, food packaging, wrappers, sign boards, publicity material,
dresses of its work men, staff and waiters, etc.
application

for

registration

of

trade

mark

are

The plaintiff's
pending

under

application no. 973139 in class 30 dated 27th November, 2000 in
relation to foods for human consumption and under application no.
01532478 in class 42 dated 20th February, 2007 in relation to services
for providing of food and drink, restaurant, fast food and catering
services with the user claimed by the plaintiff as of 12.12.1999.

The

plaintiff has expanded its business which started in Adhchini to
Kashmiri Gate in North Delhi. The plaintiff given its sales figures for
the past few years as being over Rs. 60 lacs per annum.
3.

Defendant no. 1 is an ex employee of the plaintiff. It is

IA No. 4650/2007 in CS(OS) No. 496/2007

Page 2 of 12

alleged that the defendant nos. 1 & 2 have now started a similar trade
and business and they have opened a restaurant with the name
“Goverdhan”. The defendants, it is claimed, were well aware of the
use of the mark “Govardhan' by the plaintiff, particularly since the
defendant is an ex-employee, and it is claimed that the defendants
have adopted the said mark only with a view to encash on the
plaintiff's reputation and the goodwill.
4.

The suit came up before the Court on 16 th March, 2007

when summons in the suit were issued and the Court passed an ad
interim ex parte order of injunction against the defendants restraining
them from using the trade name/trade mark “Govardhan” in relation
to their business of running vegetarian restaurant.
5.

The defendants, it appears, were served sometime before

the middle of April, 2007 and have filed the present application on 17 th
April, 2007 to state that this Court has no territorial jurisdiction to
entertain the present suit.

However, despite the passage of more

than 30 days from the date of service of the summons, they have
failed to file their written statement.
6.

The defendants contend that the defendant no. 2 is

admittedly situated in Gurgoan which is in the State of Haryana and is
outside the territorial jurisdiction of this Court.

Defendant no. 2 is

stated to be owned and controlled by one Mr. Jitender Dhir, Sole
proprietor of defendant no. 2.

Mr. Jitender Dhir is also residing in

IA No. 4650/2007 in CS(OS) No. 496/2007

Page 3 of 12

Gurgaon.

Consequently, defendant no. 2 is neither residing nor

working for gain or carrying on business within the territorial
jurisdiction of this Court.

Defendant no. 1 is stated to be only an

employee of defendant no. 2 and it is stated that the plaintiffs have
impleaded defendant no. 1 malafide only to mislead this Court. It is
claimed that the address of defendant no. 1 as stated in the plaint is
also incorrect. Defendant no. 1, it is alleged, to the knowledge of the
plaintiff, had left the premises mentioned in the plaint and is residing
in Gurgaon. It is also contended that in any event, the plaintiff had not
sought the leave of the Court to sue defendant no.2, in terms of
Section 20(b) of the CPC.

It is stated that the plaintiff in order to

create jurisdiction of this Court has resorted to Section 62(2) of the
Copyright Act which, in fact, is not attracted in the instant case.
7.

According to the defendants, a perusal of Para 32 of the

plaint itself shows that by no stretch of imagination, any part of the
cause of action could be said to have arisen in favour of the plaintiff
and against the defendants within the territorial jurisdiction of this
Court. In support of his arguments, learned counsel for the defendant
no. 2 placed reliance on the decision of the Hon'ble supreme Court in
Dhodha House vs. S.K. Maingi (2006) 9 SCC 41.
8.

On the other hand, counsel for the plaintiff submits that

apart from the fact that the plaintiff has invoked Section 62 (2) of the
Copyright Act since there is infringement of the copyright of the

IA No. 4650/2007 in CS(OS) No. 496/2007

Page 4 of 12

plaintiff in the artistic and stylised manner of depiction of its aforesaid
mark, this Court, even otherwise has the territorial jurisdiction to try
the suit since a part of the cause of action has arisen within the
jurisdiction of this Court, and accordingly the present suit is covered
by clause (c) of Section 20 CPC. The plaintiff refers to the averments
made in Para 34 of the plaint in this regard and submits that the issue
of territorial jurisdiction in the present case is an issue which can be
decided only by leading evidence.

He submits that for purposes of

deciding the present application, the averments made in the plaint
would have to be accepted as true and correct. The defendants have
not filed any written statements till date despite the expiry of the
statutory period of 30 days, and, therefore, the averments made in the
plaint are deemed to be admitted by the defendant at least, for the
purposes of deciding this application.
9.

Counsel for the plaintiff also placed reliance on Dhodha

House (supra) and two other decisions of this Court in 2006 (32) PTC
272 (Del.)(DB) Intas Pharmaceuticals Ltd. vs. Allergan Inc. and
2006 (33) PTC 574(Del.) S. Oliver Bernd Freier GmbH & Co. KG
vs. Karni Enterprises and Anr.
10.

Having considered that the avermetns in the plaint, the

rival contentions of the parties, and having examined the case law
relied upon by them, I am of the view that the issue of territorial
jurisdiction cannot be decided by me in this case finally and in a

IA No. 4650/2007 in CS(OS) No. 496/2007

Page 5 of 12

summary way and the same can only be determined after a full
fledged trial.
11.

The plaintiff is right in contending that if it is to be

determined whether this Court has no territorial jurisdiction at this
stage, the Court must only look at the averments in the plaint and
decide the issue on that basis.
12.

First and foremost, I find that defendant no. 1 is stated to

be residing in Delhi.

The allegations and counter allegations with

regard to his place of residence at the time of filing of this suit can
only be determined at the trial. There is no material placed on record
by the defendants to support their claim that defendant No. 1 was, at
the time of filing of the suit, not residing in Delhi.
13.

The expression 'cause of action' has received judicial

interpretation from time to time. In Read Vs. Brown (1889) 22 QBD
128; 58 LJ QB 120 Lord Eshar M.R. accepted the earlier definition
given in Cook v. Gill (1873) LR. 8 CP 107 : 42 LJ CP 98 as “every fact which it would be necessary
for the plaintiff to prove, if traversed, in order
to support his right to the judgment of the
Court. It does not comprise every piece of
evidence which is necessary to prove each
fact, but every fact which is necessary to be
proved.”
14.

Fry L.J. agreed and said, “Everything which, if not proved,

gives the defendant an immediate right to judgment, must be part of
the cause of action.”

IA No. 4650/2007 in CS(OS) No. 496/2007

Page 6 of 12

The Privy Council in AIR (36) 1949 PC 78,
Mohammad Khalil Khan & Others V. Mahbub Ali
Mian & Others, apart from noticing the
aforesaid decision also notices its earlier
judgment in Mt. Chand Kour vs. Partab
Singh (1887-1888) 15 I.A. 156 : (16 Cal.98
P.C.) wherein Lord Watson who delivered the
judgment of the Board observed as follows:

15.

“Now the cause of action has no relation
whatever to the defence which may be set up
by the defendant, nor does it depend upon the
character of the relief prayed for by the
plaintiff. It refers entirely to the grounds set
out in the plaint as the cause of action, or, in
other words, to the media upon which the
plaintiff, asks the Court to arrive at a
conclusion in his favour.”
Paragraph 34 of the plaint contains the

plaintiff's

averments with regard to the territorial jurisdiction of this court and
the material part thereof reads as follows:
“This Hon'ble Court has the territorial jurisdiction to
try and adjudicate the present suit. The defendant
no. 1 resides in Delhi at 140-G, 1st Floor, Gautam
Nagar, New Delhi and works for gain at Delhi. ... ...
Both defendants no. 1 & 2 individually or in unison
are soliciting customers, clients and trade of the
plaintiff in Delhi. The defendants are carrying on,
promoting and soliciting trade under the impugned
GOVERDHAN trade mark/trade name in Delhi interalia
by circulating trade & promotional material, packed
foods etc. and through the word of mouth in Delhi
thereunder.
The defendants are catering to
customers/clients based and residing in Delhi.
Numerous residents of Delhi are availing of the
impugned goods & business of the defendants. ... ...
The plaintiff's said goods & business under its said
trade mark/trade name and the goodwill and
reputation thereof is being adversely effected in Delhi
due to the defendants impugned activities.
The
defendants impugned acts of passing off and violation
and infringement of copyright are taking place in
Delhi. The cause of action in whole and/or in part has
IA No. 4650/2007 in CS(OS) No. 496/2007

Page 7 of 12

arisen within the jurisdiction of this Hon'ble Court. ...
...in Delhi from its aforesaid two restaurants, which
are its nerve center and from where the plaintiff has
been controlling and carrying on each and every
aspect of its said goods & business under its said
trade mark/trade name, respectively in Adchini and
Kashmiri Gate in Delhi.
This Hon'ble Court, in
addition, also has the jurisdiction to try and
adjudicate the present suit by virtue of Section 62(2)
of the copyright Act.”
16.

From the aforesaid it is evident that it is, inter-alia, claimed

by the plaintiff that the defendants are soliciting customers, clients
and trade of the plaintiff in Delhi. It is claimed that they are promoting
and soliciting business under the impugned trademark/trade name in
Delhi by circulating trade and promotional material, packed food and
by word of mouth in Delhi. It is claimed that the defendants are
catering to customer residing in Delhi. The plaintiff also claims adverse
effects on, inter-alia, its reputation in Delhi. The aforesaid actions, to
my mind, constitute a part of the cause of action which the plaintiff
claims have arisen in its favour.
17.

Even if one were to ignore the other averments made by

the plaintiff, which, according to him, constitute a part of the cause of
action, at least the averments culled out in the previous paragraph
would in my view, constitute a part of the cause of action since the
plaintiff would have to prove the aforesaid conduct and actions of the
defendants to support its claim for injunction and damages on the
ground that it causes prejudice to the business of the plaintiff. The
averment of the plaintiff that the defendants are soliciting the
IA No. 4650/2007 in CS(OS) No. 496/2007

Page 8 of 12

prospective customers of the plaintiff also finds support from the
report of the Local Commissioner appointed by this court which shows
that the defendant is distributing its food packets by providing home
delivery to its customers. The argument of the defendants that the
free home delivery service is restricted within a radius of 5 Kms,
cannot be taken to mean that it does not deliver its food packets
beyond the limit of 5 Kms free or otherwise for a charge. Moreover,
these averments would have to be tested at the trial of the suit. As
aforesaid, the averments made in the plaint have to be assumed to
correct, if the issue of jurisdiction is to be decided by this court at this
preliminary stage.
18.

A Division Bench of this court in Intas Pharmaceuticals

Ltd. (supra), considered, inter-alia, the decision of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in Dhodha House (Supra). The Division Bench in this
decision rejected the contention that section 134 of the Trademarks
Act overrides the provision of section 15 of the CPC and that it
impliedly repeals section 20 of the CPC. The court further held that
section 134 of the Trademarks Act, 1999 does not whittle down the
provision of section 20 of the CPC, but it only provides an additional
forum and place for filing the suit in the case of infringement of a
registered trademark. In paragraph 16, the court recorded that the
Respondent/ plaintiff was founding its arguments in support of the
territorial jurisdiction of the court on section 20 of the CPC and not on

IA No. 4650/2007 in CS(OS) No. 496/2007

Page 9 of 12

section 134 of the Trademarks Act, 1999. Paragraph 17 to 19 of the
said decision are relevant to this case and are reproduced herein:
“17. When the aforesaid provision is
examined in the light of the facts of the present
case, it is crystal clear that in fact, the provisions of
Section 20(a) and 20(b) will not be applicable to the
facts of the present case. Therefore, the only
provisions which could be attracted in the present
case are the provisions of Section 20(c) of the CPC.
The said provision enable a plaintiff to file a suit in
all such places where the cause of action arises
either wholly or in part. In the present case, the
specific plea of the respondent/plaintiff herein is
that this court has the territorial jurisdiction to try
and entertain the suit as the defendant is selling
the offending products in Delhi, which statement is
also admitted by the appellant/ defendant in its
written statement. In view of the aforesaid position,
the learned Single Judge rightly held that this court
will have the territorial jurisdiction to try and
entertain the present suit.
18. We find no reason to take a different
view particularly also in the light of the decision of
the Supreme Court in Dhodha House (Supra). In the
said decision, the Supreme Court has categorically
stated that for the purpose of deciding the case in
Dhodha House (Supra), the question as to whether
the defendant had been selling its products in Delhi
or not was wholly irrelevant. One of the grounds on
which the Division Bench of this court in P.M.
Diesels Ltd. v. Patel Field Marshal Industries (supra)
held that the Delhi Court has territorial jurisdiction
as the defendant was selling the goods under the
impugned trademark at Delhi and thus the
plaintiff's right thereof had been violated at Delhi.
In the said decision, the Division Bench of this
Court, however, did not advert to the said
contention raised therein saying that the question
as to whether the defendant has been selling its
products on a commercial scale at Delhi was a
question of fact and was required to be properly
determined in the case only after evidence was led
by the parties. It is in that context that the Supreme
IA No. 4650/2007 in CS(OS) No. 496/2007

Page 10 of 12

Court has held that the question as to whether the
defendant had been selling its products in Delhi is
wholly irrelevant.

19.

19. In this view of the matter, the ratio of
the decision of the Supreme Court in Dhodha House
(supra) is not at all applicable to the facts and
circumstances of the present case, to the aforesaid
extent, as it had no occasion to deal with the issue
regarding selling of the goods by the defendant in
Delhi due to part of the cause of action had arisen
within the territorial jurisdiction of this court. Two
decisions rendered by the Single Judges of this
court and the present impugned order passed by
another learned Single Judge have held that since
the offending goods are being sold by the appellantdefendant at a particular place, it shall definitely
give jurisdiction to the court of such a place, which
is also what was held in M/s. Jawahar Engineering
Company (supra). It is necessary to mention at this
stage that in view of the decision rendered in
Dhodha House (supra), the Supreme Court held that
the decision in M/s. Jawahar Engineering Company
(supra) will not be applicable to the facts of the
case before it. Since the application for registration
of trademark in the cases before it had not been
made within the territory of Delhi, the Supreme
Court in the case of Dhodha House (supra) found
and held that the decision in the case of M/s.
Jawahar Engineering Company (supra) would be
inapplicable to the facts of the said case before it.
In the said case, the Division Bench of this court
also held that such Court will have jurisdiction
where the trade mark is sought to be sold and if
such trade mark is being sought for sale in Delhi
amongst other places, Delhi shall also have
jurisdiction to entertain such a suit.”
In view of the aforesaid I do not consider it necessary to

separately deal with the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Dhodha House (Supra) since it has been exhaustively considered and
dealt with by the Hon'ble Division Bench of this court. On the same
line is the decision of this court in Karni Enterprises and Anr
IA No. 4650/2007 in CS(OS) No. 496/2007

Page 11 of 12

(Supra).
20.

Since the issue, is being decided at this stage, without

even a written statement being filed by the defendants, the averments
made in the plaint are assumed to be correct and therefore, the
aforesaid

decisions

squarely

apply

to the

facts

of this

case.

Accordingly, the present application is dismissed.
21.

The defendants are granted 30 days time to file their

written statement/reply. In case the same is filed, the plaintiff may file
its replication/rejoinder within two weeks thereafter. The parties
should also file their respective original documents within four weeks.
22.

List the matter before Joint Registrar for admission and

denial of the documents on 31.08.2007 and before this court for
framing of issues and hearing on pending applications on 13.09.2007.

July 23, 2007

VIPIN SANGHI, J.

aruna/P.K. BABBAR

IA No. 4650/2007 in CS(OS) No. 496/2007

Page 12 of 12

