*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

WP(C) No.6029/03
Judgment reserved on:

%

August 21, 2007

Judgment delivered on: September 24, 2007
Govt. of National Capital Territory of Delhi & Ors. .... Petitioner
Through: Ms. Avnish Ahlawat with
Ms. Latika Choudhary,
Advocates
versus
Ms. Sunita Mumgaie
Through:

..... Respondent
Mr. V. K. Shali with
Ms. Mamta R. Jha, Advocates

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

No
Yes
Yes

VIPIN SANGHI, J.
*

1.

The petitioner assails the order dated 9th April, 2003

passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Principal Bench,
New Delhi (the Tribunal) in OA No.2568/2002 filed by the
respondent, and the order dated 23rd June, 2003 passed in RA No.
153/2003 filed by the petitioner, in the aforesaid OA, whereby the
Tribunal allowed the said OA and issued a direction to the
petitioner herein to issue a letter of appointment to the
WP(C) No.6029/03

Page 1

of 20

respondent as TGT (Social Studies) as the last person selected in
the SSSC Exam of 1998, ahead of those who have been recruited
in the subsequent examinations. Further consequential direction
has been issued to the effect that she would be entitled to get
seniority from her retrospective date of appointment.

The

Tribunal by its latter order dismissed the Review Application filed
by the petitioner by holding that the same was not maintainable,
it being an attempt to re-argue the case on merits.
2.

A selection process was held by the Delhi Subordinate

Services

Selection

Board

(DSSSB)

to

fill

up

vacancies

of

TGT/Language Teaches in the schools run by the petitioner nos. 1
& 2 which arose in 1998-99 or earlier.

Amongst others, there

were 57 vacancies in the category of TGT (Social Science)
(Female), which were notified on 8.5.98, 11.1.99 and 27.9.99.
The

respondent

was

a

general

category

candidate

who

participated in the selection process for a post of TGT (Social
Science).

The petitioner states that the break up of these

vacancies was as follows:
25
5
23
4
57
3.

General
SC
ST
OBC

These vacancies included horizontal reservation for 1

WP(C) No.6029/03

Page 2

of 20

blind and 3 ex-serviceman candidates.

This meant that such

vacancies were to be adjusted laterally in any of the categories in
which such candidates were available. Consequently, a candidate
who is physically handicapped/blind, and is selected against the
physically handicapped quota has to be placed in the appropriate
category, if he also belongs to SC category, he will be selected in
that quota and will occupy a slot meant for the scheduled caste
candidate in the roster.

Similarly, if he belongs to the general

category, he will occupy a slot meant for the general category in
the Roster.
4.

Consequent upon the conclusion of the selection

process conducted by the DSSSB for the post of TGT (Social
Science),

in the merit list prepared by the petitioner for the

general category, respondent's name appeared at serial no. 25.
One Manisha, a visually handicapped candidate, respondent no. 4
herein, was placed at serial no. 38 in the general category merit
list.
5.

This dispute has arisen since respondent no. 4 has

been appointed by the petitioner, with the result that the
respondent no. 1 could not be accommodated, since, according to
the petitioner, there were only 25 vacancies in the general
category and there was horizontal reservation of one post for a
WP(C) No.6029/03

Page 3

of 20

visually handicapped candidate which was alloted to respondent
no. 4.
6.

It appears that after the conclusion of the selection

process wherein the respondent had participated, the petitioner
initiated a fresh recruitment process by issuing an advertisement
dated 12.12.2000 for which the petitioner called applications for
filling up 24 posts of TGT (Social Science).
7.

Thereupon respondent no. 1 filed OA No. 1947/01 to

challenge her being denied appointment. Based on the fact that
further vacancies of TGT (Social Science) had been notified in
December, 2000, the contention of respondent no. 1 was that
there were existing vacancies against which she ought to have
been appointed.

This petition was disposed of on 7.8.2001

directing the petitioner herein to consider her representation and
pass an appropriate order.
8.

The petitioner passed an order dated 21.9.2001 in

compliance of the aforesaid order, the relevant portion whereof
reads as follows:“I have also carefully gone through the department's
record on the subject. According to the facts in File
No.DE.3(34)/E-III/99 of Establishment-III Branch, DSSSB
had forwarded dossiers of 633 candidates who were
declared successful in the exam conducted on 8.8.1999
against notified vacancies under different subjects. Smt.
Sunita Mumgai was one of them for the post of TGT
(Social Science) Female. The vacancies notified under
Social Science female category were as under:WP(C) No.6029/03

Page 4

of 20

Total vacancies notified
TGT Social Science
(Female)
57

Gen. SC ST OBC OPH Blind (For
lateral adjustment
only)
25

05

23

04

01

Against this notified vacancies, the DSSSB has
forwarded 64 dossiers as under :General Category
26.[from S.No.1 to 25 & 38
(VH)]
Scheduled Caste Category 05.[S.No.26, 28, 29, 30 & 32]
OBC
04.[S.No.27, 31, 33 & 35]
Scheduled Tribe Category 29.[S.No. 34, 36, 37, 39 to 64]
Thus, it is seen that dossier of one candidate was
forwarded in excess of notified vacancies under
Social Science female general category and
dossiers of 6 candidates in excess of notified
vacancies under Social Science (female) Scheduled
Tribe category were received. In other categories
also, dossiers in excess of notified vacancies were
received.
Receipt of excess dossiers and inclusion of excess
candidates in the panel is a standard practice.
Inclusion of the names in the panel does not
automatically confer the right of appointment. The
appointment is offered to the candidates subject to
the availability of the vacancies and in order of
merit.
In this case, though Mrs. Mumgaie's name figures
in the panel, unfortunately she could not be
offered appointment because before her turn could
come, the vacancies had exhausted.
I understand her anxiety and dis-appointment but there
appears no way by which she could be accommodated.
All dossiers which could not be offered appointment up to
December, 2000 were returned to the DSSSB for
cancellation.
The dossiers returned to the DSSSB
included the dossier of Mrs. Mumgaie.

9.

In view of the above facts, it is regretted that it is not
possible to offer appointment to Mrs. Sunita Mumgaie.”
(emphasis supplied)

The respondent, it appears, continued to represent to

the petitioner to seek appointment on the basis of her merit
WP(C) No.6029/03

Page 5

of 20

position as aforesaid, on the ground that sufficient number of
vacancies were still available for the post of TGT (Social Science).
Respondent

relied

upon

OM

dated

8.2.1982

bearing

no.

22011/2/79-Estt (D) and the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in Prem Prakash vs. Union of India & Ors. AIR 1984 SC
1831, wherein the said OM had been dealt with.
10.

At this stage, we may reproduce the relevant extract of

the OM dated 8.2.1982 as also the relevant extract from the
decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court for a proper understanding
of the respondents case.
Extract of OM dated 8.2.1982.
“4. Once a person is declared successful according
to merit list of selected candidates, which is based
on the declared number of vacancies, the
appointing authority has the responsibility to
appoint him even if the number of vacancies
undergoes a change, after his name has been
included in the list of selected candidates. Thus,
where
selected
candidates
are
awaiting
appointment, recruitment should either be
postponed till all the selected candidates are
accommodated or alternatively intake for the next
recruitment reduced by the number of candidates
already awaiting appointment and the candidates
awaiting
appointment
should
be
given
appointments first, before starting appointments
from a fresh list from a subsequent recruitment of
examination.”
Extract from the judgment of the Supreme Court in
Prem Prakash (supra):
WP(C) No.6029/03

Page 6

of 20

11.

“It is clear from this notification that if selected
candidates are available from the previous list
there should either be no further recruitment until
those candidates are absorbed or in the
alternative vacancies which are declared for the
subsequent years should take into account the
number of persons who are already in the list of
selected candidates who are still awaiting
appointment. The notification further shows that
there should be no limit on the period of validity of
the list of selected candidates prepared to the
extent of declared vacancies. Once a person is
declared successful according to the merit list of
selected candidates the appointing authority has
the responsibility to appoint him even if the
number of vacancies undergoes a change after his
name is included in the list of selected
candidates.”
These representations were also turned down by the

petitioner in January, 2002.

In May 2002, the petitioner issued

another advertisement to fill up 26 vacancies in the post of TGT
(Social Science). Thereupon, respondent no. 1 again approached
the Tribunal by filing OA No. 1485/02. Apparently, the petitioner's
order dated 21.9.2001 was not impugned by the respondent
before the Tribunal in this O.A. The respondent relied upon OM
dated 8.2.1982 before the Tribunal to contend that she could still
be appointed against the existing vacancies. Once again, the said
OA was disposed of by the Tribunal vide order dated 3.6.2002,
thereby directing the petitioner to pass a reasoned and speaking
order in the light of OM dated 8.2.1982.
12.

The petitioner passed yet another order on 7.8.2002

WP(C) No.6029/03

Page 7

of 20

stating that it was not possible to offer an appointment to
respondent no. 1.

Consequently, respondent no. 1 once again

knocked the doors of the Tribunal complaining of the rejection of
her representation and her being denied appointment to the post
of TGT (Social Science). On this third occasion in OA No. 2568/02,
respondent no. 1 came out victorious with the passing of the
impugned order dated 9th April, 2003.
13.

Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the

Tribunal gravely erred in misinterpreting the said OM dated
8.2.1982 and in failing to appreciate the ratio of the decision of
the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Prem Prakash (supra).

She

further submits that the Tribunal had wrongly proceeded on the
assumption that there were 58 vacancies of TGT (Social Science)
(Female), when as a matter of fact, there were only 57 vacancies
in that category and out of those only 25 vacancies were
unreserved, subject to horizontal reservation, as aforesaid. She
drew our attention to the reply filed by the petitioner to the OA,
wherein it had been clearly stated that there were 57 vacancies of
TGT (Social Science) (Female) which included 25 in the General
category.

She also submitted that the petitioner had, in fact,

preferred a review petition bearing RA No. 153/2003, specifically
pointing out this patent error in the judgment dated 9th April,
WP(C) No.6029/03

Page 8

of 20

2003, but the Tribunal again failed to notice the error and
rejected the Review application mechanically, holding the same
as an attempt to re-argue the case by the petitioner.
14.

Learned counsel for the respondent sought to justify

the impugned order by placing reliance on Prem Prakash
(supra) and the aforesaid OM.

The respondent also contended

that the petitioner ought to have maintained a separate
reservation roster for each identified post filled through direct
recruitment for the physically handicapped persons in Group 'A'
and 'B' posts.

It was contended that the validity of a panel of

selected candidates is 1 year to 18 months. In the present case,
further vacancies were advertised by the petitioner before the
said period.
15.

Having considered the matter, we are of the view that

the judgment of the Tribunal passed in the aforesaid OA and RA
are laconic and cannot be sustained. The categorical stand of the
petitioner before the Tribunal was that there were a total of 57
vacancies notified for the post of TGT (Social Science) (Female),
out of which 25 fell in the general category and one was reserved
for blind candidate for lateral adjustment only.

The relevant

extract from the counter reply filed by the petitioner herein before
the Tribunal through its Deputy Director, Administration (Director
WP(C) No.6029/03

Page 9

of 20

of Education, Mr. M.R. Rao) is extracted here-in-below:“That in the year 1999 DSSSB has forwarded dossiers
of 633 candidates who were declared provisionally
successful in the examination against notified
vacancies under different subjects.
Smt. Sunita
Mumgai was one of them whose name appear at S.No.
25 of the merit list of 64 candidates for the post of
TGT (Social Science) (Female). Merit list is placed at
Annexure-1. She was recommended for appointment
under General (UR) category. The vacancies notified
under General (UR) category were as under :Total vacancies
notified TGT Social
Science (Female)

Gen.

SC ST

OBC OPH Blind (for
lateral adjustment
only)

57

25

05

04

23

Against this notified vacancies,
forwarded 64 dossiers as under :General Category
Scheduled Cast Category
OBC
Scheduled Tribe Category

16.

01
the

DSSSB

has

26 [from S.N.1 to 25 &
38 (VH)]
05 [S.No. 2628, 29, 30
& 32]
04 [S.No.27, 31, 33 &
35]
29 [S.No. 34, 36, 37, 39
to 64]”

Pertinently this was the consistent stand of the

petitioner as can be seen from its earlier communication/order
dated 21.9.2001 which is also extracted here-in-above. Despite
this being the position, the Tribunal accepted the oral submission
of the respondent while passing the impugned order that there
were 29+29 = 58 vacancies which had been declared in the
advertisement whereas only 57 persons had been called and that
the applicant/respondent had been placed at serial no. 25 in the
WP(C) No.6029/03

Page 10

of 20

general list as the last person. This is so recorded in Para 5 of its
order dated 9th April, 2003 by the Tribunal.
17.

The Tribunal did not go into the aspect as to whether

there were, in fact, 57 or 58 posts notified to be filled in the
selection process in question, and the Tribunal did not expressly
reject the stand of the petitioner that there were only 57 posts
which had to be filled in the selection process in question. Even a
perusal of the Original Application filed by the respondent shows
that the respondent did not seek to set up a case that the stand
of the petitioner in its order/communication dated 21.9.2001 that
there were 57 vacancies to be filled was incorrect and the
number of vacancies were, in fact, 58.
18.

Considering the fact that the petitioner had taken a

categorical stand through a responsible officer by filing their reply
before the Tribunal that there were 57 vacancies, out of which 25
fall in the general category, which could possibly include one
reserved post for a visually handicapped candidate, as also the
fact that the respondent did not produce any material to dispute
the said position, in our view, the Tribunal fell in error in
proceeding on the assumption that there were 58 vacancies to be
filled by the petitioner which included 26 general category posts.
We are also of the view that the Tribunal ought to have made
WP(C) No.6029/03

Page 11

of 20

amends on in its own when the said patent error in its impugned
order dated 9th April, 2003 was brought to its notice by the
petitioner by filing a Review Application being RA No. 153/2003.
Instead, it appears the Tribunal mechanically rejected the Review
Application by terming it as an attempt to re-argue the issue.
19.

On

the

aforesaid

vacancies, out of which 25

premise,

that

there

were

57

fell in the general category and 1

vacancy was horizontally reserved for the visually handicapped
candidate, we now proceed to consider whether the respondent
was entitled to the relief claimed by her in terms of the aforesaid
OM dated 8.2.1982 and the judgment of the Supreme Court in
Prem Prakash (supra).
20.

It is well settled that merely because a person has

been selected and placed on the select panel, he does not acquire
an indefeasible right of being appointed (Shankaran Dash Vs.
Union of India 1991 (3) SCC 470). As explained by the petitioner
in its counter affidavit before the Tribunal, out of the 57 vacancies
25 were unreserved, that is, falling in the general category, 5
reserved for scheduled casts, 23 reserved for scheduled tribes
and 4 reserved for other backward classes.
laterally/horizontally

reserved

for

a

One vacancy was

visually

handicapped

candidate. As against 57 notified vacancies, DSSSB forwarded 64
WP(C) No.6029/03

Page 12

of 20

dossiers which, inter alia, included 26 in the general category i.e
from serial no. 1 to 25 and 38 (visually handicapped), as against
23 posts reserved for scheduled tribes category, 29 dossiers were
sent by the DSSSB. It appears that dossier of one candidate was
forwarded in excess of the notified vacancies under the (TGT
Social Science) (Female) general category, and similarly dossiers
of 6 candidates in excess of notified vacancies under the
scheduled tribe category were received by the petitioners. The
petitioners further state that from time to time, the candidates
whose dossiers were received in excess of the notified vacancies
were adjusted against the vacancies left out due to cancellation of
dossiers

under

the

respective

subject/gender/category.

The

dossiers which could not be adjusted upto December, 2000 were
returned to DSSSB for cancellation vide letter dated 12.1.2001
which include the dossier of the respondent.

The panel was

operated taking into account the number of notified vacancies
and not the number of recommended candidates.
This conduct of the petitioners is reasonable and there
is no illegality in it. We also find force in the submission of the
petitioner that the receipt of excess dossiers and inclusion of
excess candidates in the panel, which is stated a standard
practice, does not automatically confer the right of appointment
WP(C) No.6029/03

Page 13

of 20

on such candidates.
The Supreme Court in Sanjoy Bhattacharjee vs. Union of
India (1997) 4 SCC 283, held that when the panel was made in
the excess of the notified vacancies, the waiting list candidates
have no right to seek appointment and such waiting list in excess
of the notified vacancies is unconstitutional. To the same effect is
the Judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Ashok Kumar
and Ors. vs Chairman, Banking Services Recruitment
Board and Ors. JT 1995 (8) SC 276, wherein the Hon'ble
Supreme Court held that recruitment of candidates in excess of
the

notified

constitutional

vacancies
rights,

is

under

denial
Articles

and
14

deprivation

of

the

and

of

the

16(1)

Constitution, of other deserving candidates. In Union of India v.
Kali Das Batish (2006) 1 SCC 779 and State of U.P. & Ors v.
Raj Kumar Sharma, (2006) 3 SCC 330, the Hon'ble Supreme
Court held that mere inclusion in the select list does not confer
any right to be selected even if some vacancies are not filled up.
21.

Now coming to the OM dated 8.2.1982, we find that

the said OM had no application in the facts of the present case.
Perusal of the extracted portion of the aforesaid OM would show
that the said OM would apply where:
1) A person is declared successful according to
merit list of select candidates;
WP(C) No.6029/03

Page 14

of 20

2) The merit list of select candidates is based on
the declared number of vacancies; and
3) The declared number of vacancies undergoes
a change after the person's name is included in
the list of select candidates.
It is in the aforesaid circumstances that the said OM

22.

mandates that further recruitment should either be postponed till
all the selected candidates are accommodated or, alternatively,
intake for the next recruitment reduced by the number of
candidates already awaiting appointment, and the candidates
should be given appointment first, before starting appointments
from a fresh list from a subsequent recruitment process.
23.

In the present case there were only 25 notified

vacancies in the general category with one vacancy laterally
reserved for a blind candidate. Unfortunately for the respondent
the

most

meritorious

visually

handicapped

candidate

also

happened to be a general category candidate. Consequently, that
handicapped candidate i.e. respondent no.4 had to be adjusted
against the general category vacancy. It cannot, therefore, be
said that the respondent was amongst the successful candidates
in the merit list based on the declared number of vacancies, since
she was at srl.no.25 in the general category but had to make way
for respondent no.4 on account of the horizontal reservation, as
aforesaid. Secondly, it is not even the respondent's case that the
WP(C) No.6029/03

Page 15

of 20

number of vacancies has undergone a change.

There were 57

vacancies alone that were notified, out of which 25 belonged to
general category and as a matter of fact 25 general category
candidates were selected and given appointment. Consequently,
the panel of selected candidates, i.e., those falling at serial not. 1
to 24 and respondent no. 4 who was the visually handicapped
candidate, and,

consequently entitled to be adjusted laterally

against the serial no. 25 in the merit list for the general category,
stood exhausted and there was no question of keeping the said
panel alive for any length of time. We are fortified in our view by a
Full Bench decision of this court in Maninder Kaur v. Delhi
High Court & Ors., 57 (1995) DLT 288 (FB), wherein, while
dealing with the aforesaid O.M. in similar facts, this court held:
“(36) The office memorandum dated 8th
February 1982 is Annexure P.4 to the writ
petition
of
Malkhan
Singh.
The
said
memorandum has also been reproduced in the
decision of the Supreme Court in Prem
Parkash's case. A perusal of the said
memorandum shows that it is applicable in a
case where a person is declared successful
according to merit list of selected candidates
which is based on the declared number of
vacancies. The responsibility vests on the
appointing authority to appoint such a person
even if number of vacancies undergo a change
after his name has been included in the list of
selected candidates. It is thus evident that if a
candidate has not been selected against the
declared number of vacancies no right flows to
him on the basis of the aforesaid Memorandum.
Mr. Malkhan Singh had applied against one post
WP(C) No.6029/03

Page 16

of 20

reserved for scheduled caste. For that post Mr.
Padam Singh was selected, recommended and
ultimately appointed. Likewise, the declared
number of vacancies when Mr. Sanjay Kaul
applied were four which were reserved for
scheduled castes and scheduled tribes It was
notified in the advertisement that these
vacancies shall be filled from general category
candidates in the event of suitable candidates
from reserved category were not available.
Only one candidate Mr. L.D. Maul belonging to
scheduled castes community was found
suitable. No other candidate from reserve
category was found suitable. The High Court,
however, prepared a panel of six candidates of
general category. The name of Respondent
Nos. 9, 7 and 8 were at Serial No. 1,2 and 3
respectively in the panel prepared in 1988. Mr.
Sanjay Kaul was at serial No. 6 on the panel.
There were also other advaocates at Serial
No.4 and 5 of that panel. Against the four
declared number of vacancies, one from
scheduled caste community and three from
general category were selected. Mr. Kaul
cannot claim right to the appointment against a
future vacancy. In case the contention that the
entire panel is to be exhausted irrespective of
the numbner of vacancies which may have
been notified for selection is accepted, it may
lead to continuing the panel in perpetuity which
would be arbitrary and would infringe Article 14
and 16 of the Constitution thereby depriving
other eligible candidates for being considered
for public employment. In this regard we may
also notice a recent decision of the Supreme
Court in the case of Gujarat State Deputy
Executive Engineers' Association Vs. The State
of Gujarat & Ors. JT 1994 (3) SC 559. The Apex
Court has held that a candidate from the
waiting list has no . right to claim appointment
to any future vacancy which may arise unless
the selection was held for it. The effect of
making appointments of candidates from the
waiting list on candidates who become eligible
for competing for vacancies available in future,
was expressed by Supreme Court in the
WP(C) No.6029/03

Page 17

of 20

following words "Awaiting list prepared .in an examination
conducted by the Commission does not
furnish a source of recruitment. It is
operative only for the contingency that if
any of the selected candidates does not
join then the person from the waiting list
may be pushed up and be appointed in
the vacancy so caused or if there is some
extreme exigency the Government may
as a matter of policy decision pick up
persons in order of merit from the waiting
list. But the view taken by the High Court
that since the vacancies have not been
worked out properly, therefore, the
candidates from the waiting list were
liable to be appointed does not appear to
be sound. This practice, may result in
depriving those candidates who become
eligible for competing for the vacancies
available in future. If the waiting list in
one examination was to operate as an
infinite stock for appointments, there is a
danger that the State Govern- ment may
resort to the device of not holding an
examination for years together and pick
up candidates from the waiting list as arid
when
required.
The
constitutional
discipline requires that this Court should
not permit such improper exercise of
power which may result in creating a
vested interest and perpetrate waiting list
for the candidates of one examination at
the cost of entire set of fresh candidates
either from the open'or even from
service."
(37) It is also well settled that empanelment
gives no right of appointment. The Supreme
Court in the case of State of Bihar & Ors Vs.
The Secretariat Assistant Successful and
Examinees Union 1986 & Ors. JT 1993 (6) SC
462 has held "It is now well settled that a person who is
selected does not, on account of being
WP(C) No.6029/03

Page 18

of 20

empanelled
alone,
acquire
any
indefeasable
right
of
appointment.
Empanelment is at the best a condition of
eligibility for purposes of appointment and
by itself does not amount to selection or
create a vested right to be appointed
unless relevant service rule says to the
contrary (See : Shankarasan Dash V.
Union of India – 1991 (3) SCC 47 and
Sabita Prasad & Ors. Vs .State ofBihar &
Ors - 1992 (3) Scale 361). We are,
therefore, of the opinion that the
directions given by the High- Court for
appointment
of
the
empanelled
candidates according to their position in
the merit list against the vacancies till
1991 was not proper and cannot be
sustained. Since, no examination has
been held since 1987, persons who
became
eligible
to
compete
for
appointments
were
denied
the
opportunity to take the examination and
the direction of the High Court would
prejudically effect them for no fault of
theirs....”
(emphasis supplied)

24.

Consequently, we are of the view that the aforesaid OM

dated 8.2.1982 and the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court
in Prem Prakash (supra) have no application in the facts of the
present case.
25.

We may also note that after the petitioners passed a

detailed order dated 21.9.2001 clearly stating their position,
which was passed in pursuance of the order dated 7.8.2001 in OA
No. 1947/01, the respondent did not seek to question or challenge
the same.

She again approached the Tribunal only when further

vacancies were notified in May, 2002.
WP(C) No.6029/03

The conduct of the
Page 19

of 20

respondent also goes to show that she was not aggrieved by the
stand taken by the petitioners in the order dated 21.9.2001 and
she founded her case on the fact that there were more and more
vacancies being notified from time to time against one of which,
she sought appointment.
28.

In view of the aforesaid, we are of the view that the

judgment of the Tribunal in OA No. 2568/02 and RA No. 153/03
cannot be sustained and we accordingly set aside the same. The
OA filed by the respondent before the Tribunal is accordingly
dismissed.
29.

Parties are left to bear their respective costs.

VIPIN SANGHI, J.

September 24, 2007
aruna

WP(C) No.6029/03

A.K.SIKRI, J.

Page 20

of 20

