*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

W.P(C) No. 3254/1992
Judgment reserved on: 7th August, 2007
Judgment delivered on: 24th August, 2007

%

Satraj Singh
Through:

..... Petitioner
Mr. Ranbir Yadav, Advocate

versus
Union of India & Ors.
Through:

..... Respondent
Mr. R.C. Nangia, Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

VIPIN SANGHI, J.
*
1.
The petitioner has filed this writ petition under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India seeking a writ in the nature of mandamus
directing the respondents to reinstate him in service with full back
wages from the date of his dismissal.
2.

The petitioner was appointed as a Constable in Railway

Protection Force (RPF) on 7.7.1980.

While he was serving in

Company No. 30, Muradabad attached with Crime Cell of DSC,
WP(C) No. 3254/1992

Page 1 of 15

Railway Protection Force Office, Muradabad, on 3rd December, 1984,
on the complaint of one Ram Singh, Sub Inspector, Railway Security
Force, a First Information Report (FIR)/complaint was registered
against the petitioner, bearing No. 58/1984 under Section 323 IPC and
under Sections 120 and 121, Indian Railway Act. The substance of
the accusation was that the petitioner, under the influence of liquor,
came to the office of the said Ram Singh, Sub Inspector and started
abusing him, and when the complainant tried to prevent him, he
opened his belt and hit the complainant on the head.
3.

The petitioner was convicted under Section 323 IPC and

Sections 120 and 121 of Indian Railway Act by the Judicial Railway
Magistrate vide his judgment and order dated 8.12.1987 and
sentenced to 2 months' rigorous imprisonment with penalty of
Rs.50/-.

In

default

of

payment

imprisonment was to be undergone.

of

penalty,

10

days

more

In respect of his conviction

under Section 121, Railway Act, he was sentenced to one month’s
rigorous imprisonment and a penalty of Rs.30/- was imposed, and in
default, ordinary imprisonment of 7 days was to be undergone by
him.

Conviction under Section 120 of the Railways Act resulted in

penalty of a sum of Rs.30/-, and in default 5 days imprisonment.
4.

Consequent upon his aforesaid conviction, the petitioner was

dismissed from service under Rule 161 (1) of the RPF Rules, 1987 on
WP(C) No. 3254/1992

Page 2 of 15

27.1.1988.

The petitioner had preferred an appeal against his

aforesaid conviction and the learned Sessions Judge, Bikaner,
Rajasthan vide his judgment dated 4.4.1989 while dismissing his
appeal, released him on probation under Section 4 of the Probation of
Offenders Act, 1958 (hereinafter referred to as the Act). The learned
Sessions Judge, Bikaner, in the same order, inter alia, ordered that
there shall be no adverse effect on his service.
5.

Armed with the aforesaid observations of the learned Sessions

Judge, Bikaner, the petitioner represented to the respondent and
sought reinstatement in service with all consequential benefits. The
respondents declined the said representation on 26.4.1990 informing
him that he could not be taken back into service. Petitioner sent a
legal notice to the respondents again making the same demand.
However,

the

same

was

also

not

entertained

favourably.

Consequently, the petitioner, thereafter, filed the present petition.
6.

By placing reliance on Section 12 of the submission of the

petitioner is that the result of his being released on probation is that
the disqualification attached to his conviction does not survive and
consequently, he could not be dismissed from service on account of
the said conviction. He also submits that the learned Sessions Judge
has specifically directed that his convicted shall have no adverse
effect on his service, and consequently, the respondents were bound
WP(C) No. 3254/1992

Page 3 of 15

to ignore his conviction as aforesaid, and that they could not have
made that as the basis for passing the order of dismissal dated
27.1.1988.
7.

In support of his submissions, learned counsel for the petitioner

has relied upon:
i. AIR 1970 Delhi 240 Iqbal Singh Vs I.G. of Police & Ors;
ii. 1981 (Supp) SCC 17 Aitha Chander Rao vs State of A.P.;
iii.(1985) 2 SCC 358 Shanker Das vs. UOI and
iv.1985 (Supp) SCC 272 Rajbir vs State of Haryana
8.

On the other hand, the submission of learned counsel for the

respondent is that the disqualifications that is removed by virtue of
section 12 of the Act in the case of convict who is released on
probation under section 3 and 4 of the said Act is a disqualification
prescribed by law, such as the Representation of People Act, or some
other law which specifically creates a disqualification against a person
who is convicted of an offence. The said provision does not have the
effect of washing away the conviction of the person, and if he is open
to face punishment under his service conditions and Rules, as a
consequence of his conviction, the mere release on probation does
not prevent action from being taken by the employer against him as
per such service conditions and Rules. He further submits that the
directions issued by the learned Sessions Judge, Bikaner in his
WP(C) No. 3254/1992

Page 4 of 15

judgment dated

27.1.1988, to the effect that there shall be no

adverse effect on his service, was beyond his powers and is of no
avail. He has also cited various decisions in support of his arguments
to which reference is made later in this judgment.
9.

The issue, whether the release of a person on probation who is

convicted of an offence has the effect of saving him from action under
his service conditions and Rules, and whether the “Disqualification”
from which he is saved under Section 12 of the Act would also include
action against him by his employer under his service conditions/Rules
is no longer res integra.
10.

Union of India vs. Bakshi Ram (1990) 2 SCC 426 was an

appeal from a decision of the Rajasthan High Court, wherein the
Rajasthan High Court, relying upon Section 12 of the Act had held that
release on probation has the effect of removing the disqualification
attaching to the employees conviction under Section 10(n) of CRPF
Act.

The Hon’ble Supreme Court reversed the said decision of the

High Court. Paragraphs 8 to 13 of the said decision being relevant are
produced herein below:
“8. It will be clear from these provisions that
the release of the offender on probation does not
obliterate the stigma of conviction. Dealing with
the scope of Sections 3, 4 and 9 of the Probation
of Offenders Act, Fazal Ali, J., in The Divisional
Personnel Officer, Southern Railway and Anr. etc.
v. T.R. Challappan etc., [1975] 2 SLR 587 at 596
WP(C) No. 3254/1992

Page 5 of 15

speaking for the Court observed:
These provisions would clearly show that
an order of release on probation comes
into existence only after the accused is
found guilty and is convicted of the
offence. Thus the conviction of the
accused or the finding of the Court that
he is guilty cannot be washed out at all
because that is the sine qua non for the
order or release on probation of the
offender. The order of release on
probation is merely in substitution of the
sentence to be imposed by the Court.
This has been made permissible by the
Statute with a humanist point of view in
order to reform youthful offenders and to
prevent them from becoming hardened
criminals. The provisions of Section 9(3)
of the Act extracted above would clearly
show that the control of the offender is
retained by the criminal court and where
it is satisfied that the conditions of the
bond have been broken by the offender
who has been released on probation, the
Court can sentence the offender for the
original offence. This clearly shows that
the factum of guilt on the criminal charge
is not swept away merely by passing the
order
releasing
the
offender
on
probation. Under Sections 3, 4, or 6 of
the Act, the stigma continues and the
finding of the misconduct resulting in
conviction must be treated to be a
conclusive proof. In these circumstances,
therefore, we are unable to accept the
argument of the respondents that the
order of the Magistrate releasing the
offender on probation obliterates the
stigma of conviction.
9.
As to the scope of Section 12, learned Judge
went on (at 596):
WP(C) No. 3254/1992

Page 6 of 15

It was suggested that Section 12 of the
Act completely obliterates the effect of
any conviction and wipes out the
disqualification, attached to a conviction
of an offence under such law. This
argument, in our opinion, is based on a
gross misreading of the provisions of
Section 12 of the Act, the words
"attaching to a conviction of an offence
under
such
law"
refer
to
two
contingencies: (i) that there must be a
disqualification
resulting
from
a
conviction
and
(ii)
that
such
disqualification must be provided by
some law other than the Probation of
Offenders Act. The Penal Code does not
contain
any
such
disqualification.
Therefore, it cannot be said that Section
12 of the Act contemplates an
automatic disqualification attaching to a
conviction and obliteration of the
criminal misconduct of the accused. It is
also manifest the disqualification is
essentially different in its connotation
from the word 'misconduct'.
10. In criminal trial the conviction is one thing
and sentence is another. The departmental
punishment for misconduct is yet a third one. The
Court while invoking the provisions of Section 3 or
4 of the Act does not deal with the conviction; it
only deals with the sentence which the offender
has to undergo. Instead of sentencing the
offender, the Court releases him on probation of
good conduct. The conviction however, remains
untouched and the stigma of conviction is not
obliterated. In the departmental proceedings the
delinquent could be dismissed or removed or
reduced in rank on the ground of conduct which
has led to his conviction on a criminal charge;
(See Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution and
Tulsiram Patel case: 119851 Supp. 2 SCR 131 at
282).
WP(C) No. 3254/1992

Page 7 of 15

11. Section 12 of the Act does not preclude the
department from taking action for misconduct
leading to the offence or to his conviction thereon
as per law. The section was not intended to
exonerate the person from departmental
punishment. The question of reinstatement into
service from which he was removed in view of his
conviction does not therefore, arise. That seems
obvious from the terminology of Section 12. On
this aspect, the High Court speak with one voice.
The Madras High Court in R. Kumaraswami Aiyer
v.
The
Commissioner,
Municipal
Council
Tiruvannamalai and Anr., [1957] Crl. L.J. 225 Vol.
58 and Embaru (P) v. Chairman Madras Port
Trust, [1963] 1 LLJ 59 Mad., the Andhra Pradesh
High Court in A. Satyanarayana Murthy v. Zonal
Manager, L.I.C., the Madhya Pradesh High Court
in Prem Kumar v. Union of India and Ors., [1971]
Lab & Ind. cases 823, the Punjab & Haryana High
Court in Om Prakash v. The Director Postal
Services (Post and Telegraphs Deptt.) Punjab
Circle, Ambala and Ors., [1971] 1 SLR 643. The
Delhi High Court in Director of Postal Services and
Anr. v. Daya Nand, [1972] SLR 325 have
expressed the same view. This view of the High
Courts in the aforesaid cases has been approved
by this Courtin T.R.Challappan's case [1975] 2
SLR 587.
12. In Trikha Ram v. V.K. Seth and Am., [1987]
Supp. SCC 39 this Court after referring to Section
12 has altered the punishment of dismissal of the
petitioner therein into "removal from service", so
that it may help him to secure future employment
in other establishment.
13. Section 12 is thus clear and it only directs
that
the
offender
"shall,
not
suffer
disqualification, if any, attaching to a conviction
of an offence under such law". Such law in the
context is other law providing for disqualification
on account of conviction. For instance, if a law
provides for disqualification of a person for being
WP(C) No. 3254/1992

Page 8 of 15

11.

appointed in any office or for seeking election to
any authority or body in view of his conviction,
that disqualification by virtue of Section 12 stands
removed. That in effect is the scope and effect of
Section 12 of the Act. But that is not the same
thing to state that the person who has been
dismissed from service in view of his conviction is
entitled to reinstatement upon getting the benefit
of probation of good conduct. Apparently, such a
view has no support by the terms of Section 12
and the order of the High Court cannot, therefore,
be sustained.”
In Shankar Dass (supra), cited by the petitioner, the Hon’ble

Supreme Court had taken the same view. A learned Single Judge of
this Court had accepted the contention that by virtue of section 12 of
the Act employee could not be dismissed from service without
affording him a reasonable opportunity of being heard, as required by
Article 311(2) of the Constitution. The Hon’ble Supreme Court held
that “the order of dismissal from service consequent upon a
conviction is not a ‘disqualification’ within the meaning of section 12.
There are statutes which provide that persons who are convicted for
certain offences shall incur disqualifications. For example, Chapter III
of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, entitled (sic) entailed,
“Disqualification

for

membership

of

Parliament

and

State

Legislatures” and Chapter IV entitled (sic) entailed ‘Disqualification
for Voting’ contain provisions which disqualify persons convicted of
certain charges from being members of Legislatures or from voting at
elections to Legislatures. That is the sence in which the word
WP(C) No. 3254/1992

Page 9 of 15

‘disqualification’ is used in section 12 of the Probation of Offenders
Act”. The view of the learned Single Judge of this court as aforesaid
was expressly rejected by the Hon’ble Supreme Court.
12.

In the light of the aforesaid pronouncements of the Hon’ble

Supreme Court the judgment of Division Bench of this court, in Iqbal
Singh (Supra), stands impliedly overruled and is no longer good law.
The three decisions cited by the petitioner in the case of Aitha
Chander Rao (supra), Rajbir (Supra) and Shankar Dass (Supra)
wherein the Hon’ble Supreme Court while granting/upholding the
grant of probation, directed that the conviction would not affect the
service of the convict, are cases which turn on their own peculiar
facts.
13.

In Rajbir (supra), though the sentence imposed on the

conviction under Section 323 IPC was six months, the appellant had
already suffered over one years imprisonment. Both the parties to the
assault were close relations.

In these circumstances, the Hon'ble

Supreme Court observed “We are of the view that in the peculiar
facts of the case, the conviction should not affect his service’.
Similarly in Aitha Chandra Rao (supra), the Hon’ble Supreme Court
was swayed by the consideration that the Sessions Judge had found
that there was some amount of contributory negligence on the part of
the appellant and “having regard to the peculiar circumstances of this
WP(C) No. 3254/1992

Page 10 of 15

case”, the court thought it to be an eminently fit case in which the
appellant should be released on probation of good conduct under
Section 4 of the Act and section 361 Cr. P.C. In those circumstances,
the court directed that his conviction may not affect his service career
in view of Section 12 of the Probation of Offenders Act.
14.

Same is the position in the case of Shankar Dass (supra). As

aforesaid, while laying down the law that the release on probation
under the Act does not save the employee from th consequence of
suffering a penalty under the Service Rules and Conditions, in the
pitiable facts of that case, the court directed the reinstatement of the
petitioner. That was a case in which the court held that the penalty of
dismissal from service, imposed upon the appellant, was whimsical.
The petitioner was employed as a cash clerk by Delhi Milk Supply
Department. In 1962 he was prosecuted for breach of trust in respect
of a sum of Rs.500/-. He repaid that amount and pleaded guilty to the
charge. The learned Magistrate, First Class, Delhi convicted him under
Section 409 of the Penal Code but, in view of the peculiar
circumstances relating to the crime and the criminal, he was released
under the Probation of Offenders Act. As a result of his conviction,
the appellant was dismissed from service summarily w.e.f. 14th April
1964. The Supreme Court took note of the findings of the learned
Magistrate that the appellant was a victim of adverse circumstances.
WP(C) No. 3254/1992

Page 11 of 15

His son died in February 1962.

His wife fell down from an upper

storey and was seriously injured. Thereafter his daughter fell seriously
ill and and the illness lasted for 8 months. Apparently, under the force
of such adverse circumstances and misfortune, the appellant had held
back the money in question. The appellant was a middle aged man
and it was obvious that it was under compelling circumstances that
he could not deposit the money in question in time. The Supreme
Court also observed that perhaps clause (a) of the 2nd proviso to
Article 311(2) of the Constitution, confers on the Government the
power to dismiss the person from service on the ground of conduct,
which led to his conviction on a criminal charge, without a hearing.
But, that power like any other power, has to be exercised fairly, justly
and reasonably. In the facts of that case, the court held that there
were no

two opinions that the penalty of dismissal from service

imposed upon the employee was whimsical.
15.

It would be seen from the decision in Rajbir (supra) & Aitha

Chander Rao (supra), that these cases were decided in the peculiar
facts of those cases and the Hon’ble Supreme Court did not lay down
any proposition of law to the effect that in all cases where a convict is
released on probation of good conduct, it should also result in saving
the convict from any adverse impact on his service. Shankar Dass
(supra) as noticed above, is a case wherein Hon’ble Supreme Court
WP(C) No. 3254/1992

Page 12 of 15

laid down the law, contrary to the contention of the petitioner herein,
but granted reinstatement with back wages to the appellant in the
peculiar facts of that case. In these cases the relief was granted to
the delinquent officers on humanitarian considerations and the
directions given in these cases are those given under Article 142 of
the Constitution and do not form precedents Indian Drugs &
Pharmaceuticals Ltd, (2007) 1 SCC 408; Indian Bank v. ABS
Marine Products Pvt. Ltd, JT 2006 (5) SC 281.
16.

On the other aspect of the validity and effect of the directions

given by the learned Sessions Judge, Bikaner in his order dated
4.4.1989, whereby he stated that there shall be no adverse effect on
the services of the petitioner, we may refer to the decision of the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in Commandant, 20th Battalion, ITB
Police Vs. Sanjay Binjola (2001) 5 SCC 317. In this case, the
respondent Sanjay Binjola was convicted under section 10(n) of the
CRPF Act and sentenced to 3 months imprisonment. The appellate
court upheld the conviction but reduced the sentence to the extent till
the rising of the court and further directed that the order would not
adversely affect the service career of the respondent. Relying on
section 386(e) Cr. P.C., the High court upheld this further direction.
Before the Supreme Court, the appellant challenged the jurisdiction of
the appellate and the revisional court to give such a direction. The
WP(C) No. 3254/1992

Page 13 of 15

Supreme Court held that while exercising the power to amend the
order impugned, or to pass consequential or incidental orders under
Section 386(e)

Cr. P.C. the Appellate Courts power is limited to

passing of orders which are permissible under the Cr.P.C. or any other
law. Such a power does not confer a jurisdiction upon the Appellate
Court to pass orders which tend to interfere with the service career of
the convict or affect the rights of a party not before it.

The

consequential or incidental orders contemplated under Section 386(e)
Cr.P.C. are orders which follow as a matter of course being necessary
complements to the main orders without which the latter would be
incomplete and ineffective. Therefore, after passing the order of
conviction and sentence, the criminal court should not have issued
any direction relating to the service ordered of the employee which is
governed by the Act, Rules made there under and the service Rules
governing his condition of services.
17.

In our view, therefore, the directions issued by the learned

Sessions Judge, Bikaner to the effect that the conviction of the
petitioner shall not have any adverse effect on his service was
without jurisdiction and therefore not binding on the respondent.
There is no merit in any of the arguments advanced by the petitioner.
18.

No other argument has been raised by the petitioner.

With

these observations, the petition is dismissed.
WP(C) No. 3254/1992

Page 14 of 15

VIPIN SANGHI, J.

August 24, 2007

A.K.SIKRI, J.

P.K. BABBAR

WP(C) No. 3254/1992

Page 15 of 15

