*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI
Date of reserve: 14th August 2007
Date of decision: 24th September, 2007

+W.P. (C)
10009/2007
%

No.

5356/1999

&

CMs

No.4904/2007,

Rajiv Kumar & Others.
.....Petitioners
Through: Mr. B.B. Sawhney, Sr. Advocate
with Ms. Syeda Sabina Haque,
Advocates
versus

CORAM:

Union of India & Others
..... Respondents
Through: Ms. Rekha Palli with Ms. Punam
Singh, Advocate
Mr. Arun Kumar, Joint
Director (Rectt.), ESI
Corporation

HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

No

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

VIPIN SANGHI, J

1.

This writ petition was disposed off by a consent order

on 12th January, 2007.
W.P. (C) No. 5356/1999

Thereafter, the petitioners filed CM No.
Page 1 of 36

4904/2007 for recall of, inter alia, the order dated 12.1.2007
whereby the petition was disposed of and for a decision of the
petition on its merits. Another application was also moved by the
petitioners being CM No. 10009/07 for certain directions, which
will be adverted to later in this judgment.

We have heard

arguments on the aforesaid two applications and thereafter
proceeded to hear the arguments of the parties in the Writ
Petition itself, since we were inclined to allow petitioner's
application being CM No. 4904/2007 and recall the orders dated
4.1.2007 and 12.1.2007 whereby the petition was disposed of on
consent terms and to hear and decide the matter on its merits.
We shall deal with the aforesaid applications in greater detail as
we go along with this judgment.

2.

The Petitioners challenge the order dated 28th June

1999 passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Principal
Bench, New Delhi in O.A. No. 2025/1998 whereby the Tribunal
has dismissed their aforesaid O.A. The Petitioners were seeking a
direction to the Respondents to appoint them to the posts of
Allopathic Pharmacists in the office of Respondent No. 3 i.e.
Director (Medical) Delhi, ESIC, New Delhi on the basis of the
Select list dated 28th June 1998.

W.P. (C) No. 5356/1999

Page 2 of 36

3.

According to the Petitioners, the Respondents placed a

requisition with the Employment Exchange calling for names of
duly qualified pharmacists registered with them for consideration
for appointment as pharmacist through a selection process as per
the recruitment rules. They state that 450 names were sponsored
by the Employment Exchange. The Respondents issued interview
letters to more than 400 candidates. The selection Board was
constituted which interviewed the candidates and on 24th June
1998,

the

Respondents

displayed

two

lists

of

selected

candidates, one consisting of 21 names of Allopathic pharmacists
and the other of one Ayurvedic pharmacist. The Petitioners found
their names in the select list of Allopathic pharmacists. However,
they were not issued appointment letters. It is contended that
since certain influential persons were interested in getting their
favourite candidates selected to the posts in question, the
Respondents had failed to operate the select list and were now
setting up a false defence to deny the applicants the opportunity
of being appointed. Consequently, the Petitioners filed the
aforesaid O.A. before the Tribunal.

4.

The Respondents contended before the Tribunal that

there were certain complaints, which were received regarding the

W.P. (C) No. 5356/1999

Page 3 of 36

selection

process

for

selecting

pharmacists.

Upon

their

investigations, the Respondents found that the procedure was
not in accordance with the directions issued by the Supreme
Court in the case of Excise Superintendent Malkapatnam
Krishna Distt., A.P. Versus K.B.N. Vishweshwara Rao and
others, 1996 (6) SCALE 676 (Malkapatnam for future reference)
in as much as, no advertisement of the vacancies had been
issued in the newspapers. Consequently, wide publicity was not
given by the respondents as mandated by the law.

The

Respondents further contended that while awarding marks, the
Selection Board did not allot separate marks for different
parameters, such as, basic qualifications, added qualifications,
experience, performance, etc., It was contended that the award
of lump sum marks by the Selection Board was not transparent
and was irregular. Consequently, the Respondents had decided
not to operate the select list and to cancel the same.

5.

The Tribunal rejected the allegations of mala fides

made by the Petitioners as being too vague, generalized and
non-specific to stand judicial scrutiny. It held that mere
placement of a candidate in the select list does not give the
candidate an enforceable legal right to be appointed. The

W.P. (C) No. 5356/1999

Page 4 of 36

Tribunal did not find anything wrong in the conduct of the
Respondents in deciding not to operate the select list once they
had found that advertisement of the vacancies was not given in
accordance with the decision in Malkapattnam (Supra), and
that there were other deficiencies in the procedure adopted by
the Selection Committee. The Tribunal held that it could not be
said that the Respondents had acted illegally, irregularly, or
arbitrarily to warrant judicial interference.

6.

Coming to the first submission of the petitioner,it is

contended that the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Malkapatnam (Supra) did not mandatorily require notification of
the vacancies in the daily newspapers. It merely stated that in
appropriate case, in addition to intimation to Employment
Exchange, the department or undertaking should call for the
names by publication in newspaper having wider circulation and
by displaying it on their office notice board, or by announcing in
radio or employment news bulletins. It is argued that these
modes of communications are illustrative and since vacancies in
question had been notified through the Employment Exchange,
there was no illegality in the mere failure of the Respondents to
notify the said vacancies in the daily newspapers. It was also

W.P. (C) No. 5356/1999

Page 5 of 36

contended that the fact that about 450 candidates had applied
against the notified vacancies, itself shows that there was wide
publicity of the vacancies to the public in general. The Petitioners
relied on the subsequent decision of the Supreme Court in Arun
Tiwari and others Vs. Zila Mansawi Shikshak Sangh, AIR
1998 SC 331 wherein the Supreme Court had held that there are
different methods of inviting applications and the method
adopted in the exigency of that case cold not be labeled as
unfair. The selection made on the basis of names sponsored by
the Employment Exchange was held as not being ipso facto
irregular and/or liable to be canceled. The Petitioners further
contended that the procedure adopted during the selection
process was not challenged by any deserving candidate on the
ground

that

he

had

been

left

out

owning

to

lack

of

advertisement. The further contention of the Petitioner was that
the same method of selection was adopted by the Respondents
for purposes of making appointments to the post of ECG
Technicians and Drivers on the basis of names of candidates
sponsored

by

the

Employment

Exchange

and

interviews

conducted by the Respondents. In June – July 1999, a similar
process for making appointments was adopted for filling up 2000
posts of Staff Nurses. It was also contended that there was no
W.P. (C) No. 5356/1999

Page 6 of 36

mandatory requirement for the Selection Board to separately
allot marks in respect of each attribute. It was contended that
some of the Petitioners had, at the time of filing of the Writ
Petition in the year 1999, become over age and stood disqualified
from participating in any future process for the said post for no
fault of theirs and were being denied appointment due to the
scrapping of the Select List.

7.

The Respondents filed their reply in the Writ Petition.

It is stated that the matter relating to selection of pharmacist was
investigated by the Chief Vigilance Officer of ESI Corporation who
is of the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India. This
report of the Chief Vigilance Officer was considered at the highest
level in ESI Corporation and in the Ministry of Labour who even
consulted with the Ministry of Law before scraping a select List.
The select list was cancelled because of irregularities and
infirmities in the recruitment and selection process, inasmuch as,
the Selection Board;
(i)did not allocate separate marks for
qualifications,
additional
qualifications,
type of experience, as in large hospital or a
small chemist shop, with the result that it
was difficult to say whether any member
was carried away by the interview
performance alone, or by the qualification
or experience, as the case may be. In the
W.P. (C) No. 5356/1999

Page 7 of 36

absence of any tabular statement reflecting
the comparative merit of candidates based
on these criterions it was difficult to assess
the relative merit of the candidates with
reference
to
the
said
criterions/parameters.
(ii)gave
unjustified
weightage
to
performance in the interview which was
only for a few minutes;
(iii) recommended 23 persons who had
work experience of working in some private
stores only, as opposed to 6, including 1
ex-serviceman out of 19 candidates, who
had work experience in bigger reputed
hospitals. In the absence of records, their
actual performance in the interview could
not possibly be gauged and whether the
selection of the said 23 candidates in
preference over others having work
experience
with
bigger
and
better
organisations was justified or not could not
be stated with certainty.
8.

The Respondents also relied on the decision of the

Supreme Court in Union Territory of Chandigarh Vs. Dilbagh
Singh and others, (1993) 1 SCC 154, wherein the Hon'ble
Supreme Court has upheld the award of 85% marks on the basis
of educational qualifications of candidates, and only 15% marks
for

performance

of

the

candidates

at

interviews,

in

the

background that the earlier selection process was cancelled as
being dubious.

9.

The Respondents further stated that in view of the

W.P. (C) No. 5356/1999

Page 8 of 36

judgment of the Supreme Court in Malkaptnam(supra), the ESI
Corporation had drawn up a detailed recruitment procedure for
Group 'C' and 'D' posts, which had been circulated to all field
Unions vide letter dated 15.2.1999. The procedure is detailed but
precise, mathematical in character and ensures transparency in
allocation of marks for distinct parameters of the selection
process. The relevant guidelines issued by the Respondents in
their communication dated 15.2.1999 reads as follows:
“2. The selection procedure as aforesaid
had come up for scrutiny before the
Supreme Court in the case of Excise
Superintendent, Malkapatnam V/s. K.M.
Visheshwara Rao and other (1996 (6) SCC
216). The Apex Court has laid down therein
that even in cases where candidates are
called from the Employment Exchange, the
department concerned should publish the
vacancies through newspapers, radio and
television etc., and call for the applications
from the general public from open market
as well. Accordingly, the Government of
India, Ministry of Personnel & Training vide
their O.M. Bering No.14024/2/96, Estt. (D)
dated 18.5.98 has stipulated that in
addition to notifying the vacancies to
Employment Exchange wide publicity
should be given to the recruitment notices
by publishing an advertisement in the
Employment News and displaying such
recruitment notices on the office Notice
Board.
3.
The aforesaid instructions have been
adopted and circulated to all the Regional
Directors vide this Office letter bearing No.
W.P. (C) No. 5356/1999

Page 9 of 36

A-36/11/98-Exam, dated 13-07-98. A copy
of the same is enclosed for ready
reference.
4.
In view of the modified requirements
of notifying
the vacancies in the
Employment Exchange, Employment News,
office Notice Board, etc., the number of
applications received for any post in the
Corporation would be very high and in such
a case, it would be desirable to shortlist the
candidates. It has, therefore, been decided
that recruitment in respect of Group 'C' and
Group 'D' posts (para-medical, ministerial
or otherwise) for which selection was
hitherto made on the basis of interview
alone, the following procedure shall be
adopted.
a.
The vacancies shall be notified to the
concerned
Employment
Exchange,
Simultaneously, a suitable advertisement
shall be published in the Employment News
as well. The copy of the advertisement
given to the Employment Exchange shall
be circulated to all the Offices of the
Corporation in the Region for displaying on
the Notice Boards. In respect of any
recruitment by any authority or the
corporation in Delhi, the same shall be
circulated to all the offices of the
Corporation in Delhi/New Delhi/Noida.
b.
The receipt of the applications,
scrutiny thereof and finalistion of the
applications shall be done by the
appointing authority. The candidates,
whether
sponsored
through
the
Employment Exchange or direct applicants
will be asked to send a copy of mark-sheet
and other certificates of professional
qualification and experience alongwith the
application. Those, who possess the
minimum essential qualifications alone will
W.P. (C) No. 5356/1999

Page 10 of 36

be considered for shortlisting.
c.
Short listing of the candidates at this
stage will be done only on the basis of
educational qualification and professional
qualification mentioned in para 5 by the
appointing authority.
d.
Interviews for selection shall be
preceded by such shortlisting of the
candidates and the number of candidates
to be called for interviews shall be
ordinarily in the ratio of 1:5. It must be
ensured that at the time of the interview,
the original certificates of the qualifications
given by the candidates are verified.
5.
The assessment of the candidates
shall be made on the following basis:
(a)

Educational Qualifications
100 marks
(the points to be awarded out of
100 on the basis of the
percentage of grade of marks
obtained by the candidates)

(b)

Higher/professional Qualifications 100 marks
where applicable.
(the points to be awarded out of
100 as per the %age or grade of
marks in the qualifying exam by
the candidate)

(c)

Professional experience.
100 marks
(wherever applicable)
20 marks will be awarded for
each year of experience. However
if the experience is for more than
5 years, 100 marks will be
awarded.

W.P. (C) No. 5356/1999

Page 11 of 36

(d)

Interview
including
practical 100 marks.
demonstration.
Each member will award the
marks and the final marks will be
awarded based upon average of
marks awarded by each member

6. The reservation for P.H, Sportsman,
SC/ST/OBC categories will be made as
per Govt. instructions issued from time to
time.
7. After the interview, the final select list
shall be drawn by the concerned authority.
8.
The
concerned
authority
shall
scrutinize the final select list, notify the
same to all concerned and thereafter direct
the concerned appointing authority to
make appointments.
9.
The Examination Cell of the Hqrs.
Office will assist the concerned authority in
all possible ways in the recruitment process
and coordinate the work thereof.
10. These instructions shall come into
effect immediately and all selections shall
henceforth be made only in accordance
with these instructions.
11. This issues with the approval of the
Director General.

10.

The respondents contend that the aforesaid guidelines

had been ignored by the Selection Board and consequently there
was complete justification in canceling the selection process
altogether.
W.P. (C) No. 5356/1999

Page 12 of 36

11.

Before proceeding with the discussion of the case on

merits, at this juncture we think it appropriate to deal with the
aforesaid 2 applications filed by the petitioner.

12.

This matter came up before the court for hearing on

23.11.2006, when the following order was passed:
“Learned counsel for the Respondent had
brought the record in relation to a
complaint which had led to initiation of the
process of cancellation of the selection.
She also pointed out that from the
compilation of the interview results, it
appeared that some of the candidates did
not even produce the original diploma and
experience certificates, which was an
essential qualification. We find that, out of
the 10 Petitioners, 6 Petitioners i.e., 1 to 4,
6 & 10 are prosecuting the petition and
other Petitioners are stated to be not
interested as of now.
To satisfy our judicial conscience, we have,
as a random check called upon Petitioner
No.1 Rajiv Kumar, who as per the notes of
the Respondent had failed to produce the
original
experience
and
diploma
certificates to file an affidavit showing that
these were duly produced during the
interview and to produce these documents
in court.
Renotify on 1.12.2006.
In the meanwhile, Respondent would seek
necessary instructions.”
13.

As would appear, the aforesaid order was passed after

W.P. (C) No. 5356/1999

Page 13 of 36

perusing the record produced by the Respondents pertaining to
the selection process in question. The matter was again taken up
after a couple of adjournments on 14.12.2006, when the
following order was passed:
“Affidavit of Petitioner Nos. 1 to 4, 6 & 10
be filed in terms of the last order. Counsel
for the Petitioner will file the copies in court
with advance copy of the affidavits and
originals of the certificates to counsel for
the Respondent, who may in the
meanwhile have the genuineness of the
same verified. Ms. Palli to obtain further
instructions with regard to accommodating
these six Petitioners, subject to verification
of their certificates and possessing the
necessary experience and qualification, as
they were suspected of not possessing the
same and this was one of the factors which
was taken into consideration while
canceling the selection process. It has been
made clear that in case the Petitioners are
engaged, it would be with retrospective
effect.
Records have
counsel.”
14.

been

returned

to

the

The matter was again taken up for hearing on

4.1.2007. After recording the background of the case, with the
consent of parties, the court passed the following order:
“We had heard counsel for the parties and
also perused the record. Without prejudice
to the rights and contentions of the parties
and with their consent the following order
is passed. Presently out of the 10
W.P. (C) No. 5356/1999

Page 14 of 36

petitioners there are only 6 petitioners,
namely, petitioners No.1 to 4, 6 & 10, who
are seeking employment. As a result of
directions given during the hearing of the
writ petition, the petitioners were required
to furnish their original diploma certificates
and
experience
certificates
as
the
authenticity of the diploma/experience
certificates of some of the candidates in
the previous selection process was also
being questioned. The petitioners assertion
is that petitioners No.1 to 4, 6 & 10 had
furnished the original diploma certificates
which have since been verified. They also
claim to have submitted the experience
certificates, some of which, according to
learned counsel for the respondents could
not be verified.
Respondents have agreed to grant age
relaxation to the aforesaid petitioners,
namely, petitioners No. 1 to 4, 6 & 10, who
were eligible at the time of last selection in
the year 1998. Learned counsel for the
respondent states that a large number of
vacancies are available and the petitioners
need not entertain any misapprehension of
their being prejudiced in any manner and
assures that the selection would be
impartial. The respondents would complete
the entire selection process within 90 days
from today. Petitioners No.1 to 4, 6 & 10
would be sent interview letters within 30
days from today and due regard and
consideration would be given to their
experience for purposes of selection. The
age relaxation to the petitioners have been
granted in the peculiar facts of this case
and would not operate as a precedent.
Learned counsel for the petitioners wishes
to take instructions whether the aforesaid
would be acceptable to his clients as a final
resolution of the disputes.
W.P. (C) No. 5356/1999

Page 15 of 36

List on 8.1.2007 at 2.00 P.M.”

15.

The matter could not be taken up by the Bench which

passed the order dated 4.1.2007 on 8.1.2007 and was taken up
on 12.1.2007. The apprehension expressed by the Petitioners
that the Respondents would be prejudiced against them in the
selection process, or in the verification of their experience
certificates were put to rest. Parties agreed by the consent order
dated 24.1.2007 in the aforesaid manner, the Writ Petition was
disposed of in terms. The Petitioners were granted liberty to
approach the court in case there is any breach of the said order.

16.

After the disposal of the Writ Petition, the Petitioners

filed C.M. No. 4904/2007. This application was filed for seeking
recall of the orders dated 4.1.2007 and 12.1.2007 aforesaid. This
application was first taken up on 17.4.2007. Delay in filing C.M.
No. 4904/2007 was condoned.

17.

C.M. No. 4904/2007 was filed on the premise that

contrary

to

the

specific

representations

made

by

the

Respondents, and the orders passed by this court that interview
letters would be sent to the Petitioners within one month from
the passing of the order dated 4.1.2007, no such letters were

W.P. (C) No. 5356/1999

Page 16 of 36

received by them. Belatedly,
communication

from

the

on 12.3.2007, they

Respondent

received a

whereby

they

were

informed that the would be granted age relaxation as per the
orders of the court and they were also asked to submit their
applications on the prescribed
Petitioners

further

representations
vacancies,

complained

made,

there

format by 31.3.2007. The

were

that
only

there
17

that
were

contrary
large

vacancies

of

to

number

the
of

pharmacist

(Alopathic) notified which included 1 reserved post of ST, 7 for
OBC, 2 for Ex-Servicemen and 1 for Physically Handicapped
person. It was contended that the basic premise on which the
consent orders dated 4.1.2007 and 12.1.2007 had been passed
by the court had been belied by the Respondent. Consequently,
the Petitioners sought recall of the order dated 4.1.2007 and
12.1.2007, as aforesaid, and the restoration of the interim orders
of status-quo earlier passed in the Writ Petition, as well as the
decision on the merits of the case.

18.

While issuing notice on C.M. No. 4904/2007, this court

recorded the submissions of the Petitioners that in fact, out of 17
notified vacancies, only 6 vacancies are falling in the General
category. The submission of the Respondents that vacancies

W.P. (C) No. 5356/1999

Page 17 of 36

reserved for Ex. Servicemen and Physically Handicapped persons
are horizontal vacancies was also noticed. The court directed the
Respondents to disclose the details of the vacancies, which are
likely to arise based on superannuation, or otherwise, in the next
one year and the feasibility of extending the concessions given
by the respondents, as recorded in the order dated 4.1.2007 to
such future vacancies.

19.

While the matter was pending consideration on the

aforesaid aspect, the Petitioners filed another application being
C.M. No. 7278/2007 for seeking early hearing in the matter, this
application was taken up on 21.5.2007. The Respondents
informed the court that advertisements have already been issued
for the notified vacancies and admit cards have been issued to
the candidates for written test. It was also recorded that the
Respondents had filed the affidavit explaining the reasons for the
fall in the number of vacancies from 82 to 17. This fall was stated
to be largely on account of merger and closure of Unit's
Dispensaries.

20.

The petitioners thereafter filed yet another application

being C.M. No. 10009/2007. This application had been filed by
the Petitioners seeking a direction that they should be issued
W.P. (C) No. 5356/1999

Page 18 of 36

interview letters instead of being excluded on the basis of written
test for short listing of candidates for interview. The basis of this
application was, that the consent orders dated 4.1.2007 and
12.1.2007 did not contemplate that the Petitioners would be
required to first appear in the written test for short listing before
being called for interview, since it was stated by the Respondents
that interview letters would be issued to the Petitioner No.1 to 4,
6 and 10 within 30 days of the passing of the order dated
4.1.2007. The Petitioner contended that they could not be
subjected to written test and that they were only to be
interviewed apart from being granted age relaxation as per the
consent order. They also stated that they had been declared
unsuccessful in the written test. According to the Petitioners the
conduct

of the Respondents was not in consonance with the

letter and spirit of the understanding reflected in the two orders
dated 4.1.2007 and 12.1.2007 passed by this court.

21.

The aforesaid C.M. No. 10009/2007 was taken up by

the court on 25.7.2007 and notice was issued to the Respondents
which was accepted by them in court. The Respondents also
informed the court that a large number of applications, i.e., over
1400 were received. A written test for short listing the

W.P. (C) No. 5356/1999

Page 19 of 36

candidates had been held wherein the Petitioner Nos. 1 to 4, 6
and 10 had voluntarily participated, but they had not qualified.

22.

From

the

aforesaid

narration

of

the

various

proceedings of the court it appears that there is a dispute with
regard to the purport of the orders passed on 4 th January 2007
and 12th January 2007.

23.

From the order dated 4th January 2007, it appears that

the Respondent made the following statements/representations:

1. That the Petitioner No.1 to 4, 6 and 10 would be granted
age relaxation, who were eligible on the last selection in the
year 1998;
2. That there are large number of vacancies available to be
filled up;
3. That the Petitioners need not entertain any apprehension of
their being prejudice in any manner and that the selection
would be impartial.
4. That the Respondents would complete the entire selection
process within 90 days from the date of the order i.e. 4th
January 2007.
5. That the Petitioner No.1 to 4, 6 and 10 would be sent
interview letters within 30 days from the date of the order,
W.P. (C) No. 5356/1999

Page 20 of 36

and due regard and consideration would be given to their
experience for the purposes of their selection.

24.

There is no quarrel so far as age relaxation is

concerned, since the Respondents have admittedly granted the
said relaxation to the Petitioner in question. However, there
seems to be a serious dispute about the requirement of the
Petitioners having to sit in a written examination. According the
the Petitioners it was represented to them that they would be
issued interview letters within 90 days, there was no mention of
any written test being conducted for the purposes of short listing
candidates for calling them for interview, or subjecting the
petitioners to any such written test.

25.

The Respondents have, however, sought to justify the

holding of the written test on the ground that there were large
number of applicants, nearly

1400

in number, who had

responded to the advertisement issued by the Respondents for
17 vacancies. Consequently, they had no option but to go in for
a written test to short list the candidates.

26.

While the Respondents may be justified in conducting

a written test to create a short list of more meritorious

W.P. (C) No. 5356/1999

Page 21 of 36

candidates, a perusal of the order dated 4th January 2007 shows
that no such written test was in contemplation in the minds of
either of the parties or the court when the said order was passed.
At the same time, it was not expressly stated that in case a
written test would be held for other eligible candidates, the
Petitioners in question would be exempted from the said test.

27.

It also appears that the representation held out to the

Petitioners by the Respondents on 4th January 2007 and 12th
January 2007 was also that there were a large number of
vacancies, whereas, as it turned out there were only 17
vacancies in all, which included 11 reserved vacancies (including
the

3

horizontal

vacancies

for

ex-servicemen

and

one

handicapped person). There were 6 clear general category
vacancies and the Petitioners in question are also 6 in number.

28.

From the aforesaid facts and circumstances it appears

to us that the representation made by the Respondents on 4th
and 12th January 2007, when the aforesaid consent order was
passed and the Writ Petition was disposed of, were materially at
variance with the factual position (in relation to the number of
vacancies) and the conduct of the Respondent (in so far as the
Petitioners in question were subjected to written test and not
W.P. (C) No. 5356/1999

Page 22 of 36

issued interview letters consequent upon their failure in the said
test). Normally, we would hold a party to its representation made
to the opposite party before the court, and would not permit a
party to resile

from its representation, but in the facts of this

case it appears that the representation that there were a large
number of vacancies left to be filled up was made on the basis of
the vacancies as they existed prior to the closure/merger of a
large number of dispensaries, which led to the reduction in the
number of vacancies by 65. The sanctioned strength, due to the
aforesaid reasons came down from 341 to 276. The respondents
have explained, with documentary proof, that out of these 276
posts, 259 were already filled up, thereby leaving a balance of 17
vacancies only.

29.

The misrepresentation by the respondents, regarding

the number of vacancies, if any, appears to be a result of a
mistake rather than an intentional attempt on their part to
mislead the petitioner or this court. The cause for reduction in the
number of vacancies, i.e., closure/merger of dispensaries arose
from time to time over the years, and it is not that this reduction
has taken place overnight.

30.

Moreover, we also find that the petitioners also first

W.P. (C) No. 5356/1999

Page 23 of 36

opted for a recall of the orders dated 4.1.2007 and 12.1.2007
when they first filed C.M. No. 4904/2007. In fact, C.M. No.
10009/2007 was not even pressed by the petitioners at the time
of argument. That being the position, we are inclined to allow the
Petitioner's application for recall of the order dated 4th January
2007 and 12th January 2007.

31.

At the same time, we do not find merit in the

Petitioner's application being C.M. No. 10009/2007 wherein the
Petitioners seek issuance of interview letters despite their failure
in the written test This relief in our view is not justified since, as
aforesaid, we cannot read into the order dated 4th January 2007
and 12th January 2007, a concession by the Respondents to the
effect that Petitioners would be exempted from a written test.
The question of grant of any such exemption as on the date of
passing of the said orders did not arise, since, that question was
not present to the mind of either the parties or the court. From
the consent orders it appears that the parties had agreed in
principle that the Petitioners would compete with the other
applicants/candidates in the selection process and that the only
relaxation or advantages that they would get would firstly relate
to their age and secondly relate to their experience. The Court

W.P. (C) No. 5356/1999

Page 24 of 36

while passing these orders could not have intended to reduce the
selection process into a farce, or an eye wash, so that only the
Petitioners qualify in the said process and get selected.

The

Petitioners had in principle agreed to be subjected to the
selection process, and the mention of the interview process in the
consent orders was only indicative of what the parties had
assumed the selection process to consist of. That did not prevent
the Respondent from resorting to a written examination to
narrow down the zone of consideration at the interview stage. As
aforesaid, this application was not even pressed by the
petitioners at the time of arguments. The relief prayed for in this
application, in fact, runs counter to the first option exercised by
the petitioners viz, to seek the recall of the orders dated 4.1.2007
and 12.1.2007. The same is therefore dismissed.

32.

In view of the aforesaid we now proceed to decide the

Writ Petition on its merit.

33.

Malkapatnam

(Supra)

was

a

case

where

the

respondents were not considered for selection on the ground that
their candidature has not been sponsored by the Employment
Exchange. They had applied independently to compete for the
selection

process

W.P. (C) No. 5356/1999

to

the

posts

in

question.

In

these

Page 25 of 36

circumstances they approached the Tribunal. The Tribunal
directed, by inetrim order, that

their candidature should be

considered. Many of these candidates got selected and orders
were issued to appoint them. The majority view of the Tribunal
was that the sponsorship of the candidate through the medium of
Employment Exchange was valid and not violative of Article 14
and 16 of the Constitution.

The minority view that the said

procedure was violative of Article 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Before the Supreme Court the respondent contended that the
restriction of the field of choice to the candidates sponsored
through the medium of Employment Exchange denies the right
to be considered for employment to a post under the state of the
people who cannot reach the Employment Exchange to get their
names sponsored and the Employment Exchanges are not
adopting fair means and procedure to send the names strictly
according to seniority in their record. It was contended by the
respondents that the better course would be to adopt both the
mediums, namely, of Employment Exchange and publication in
the newspaper and that would subserve the public purpose
better. The Supreme Court accepted the aforesaid submissions
of the respondent in the following words:
“Having regard to the respective contentions,
we are of the view that contention of the
W.P. (C) No. 5356/1999

Page 26 of 36

respondents is more acceptable which would be
consistent with the principles of fair play, justice
and equal opportunity. It is common knowledge
that many a candidates are unable to have the
names sponsored though their names are either
registered or are waiting to be registered in the
employment exchange, with the result that the
choice of selection is restricted to only such of
the candidates whose names come to be
sponsored by the employment exchange.
Under these circumstance,s many a deserving
candidate are deprived of the right to be
considered for appointment to a post under the
State.....”
34.

From the aforesaid, it is evident that the Supreme

Court in exercise of its powers under Article 142 of the
Constitution of India issued clear directions that it would be
mandatory for

the requisitioning authority which wishes to fill

posts, to not only intimate the Employment Exchange but also, in
addition, to undertake the publication in the newspapers having
wider circulations, and to display on their office notice boards or
announce on radio and employment news bulletins to call for
names of eligible candidates. In our view, it cannot be said that
the aforesaid directions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court were not
binding on the respondents. The Respondent is, undoubtedly an
instrumentality of the State and the posts that it fills up are open
to be filled up by the public at large. All authorities are bound to
follow the directions issued by the Supreme Court and such

W.P. (C) No. 5356/1999

Page 27 of 36

directions are binding and enforceable by virtue of Article 142 of
the Constitution of India. Moreover, as a matter of fact, the
respondents had itself adopted and circulated guidelines for
compliance to all its Units on 15.2.1999 in the light of the
Supreme Court decision in Malkapatnam (Supra). The Officers
of the respondent and of selection boards constituted for making
recruitments were bound to follow the said guidelines which
clearly stipulates that “the vacancies shall be notified to the
concerned Employment Exchange.

Simultaneously, a suitable

advertisement shall be published in the employment news as
well. The copy of the advertisement given in the Employment
Exchange shall be circulated to all the offices of the Corporation
in the Region for displaying on the Notice Board. In respect of
any recruitement by any authority of the Corporation in Delhi,
the same shall be circulated to all the Offices of the Corporation
in Delhi/New Delhi/Noida.”

35.

Admittedly, the aforesaid guidelines was not complied

with by the Selection Board in the present case.

36.

The reliance placed by the petitioners on the decision

of the Supreme Court in Arun Tiwari (Supra) is misplaced for
two reasons; firstly, a perusal of that decision shows that in the
W.P. (C) No. 5356/1999

Page 28 of 36

peculiar facts of that case, since the procedure of inviting
applications only from Employment Exchange instead of by
advertising “has been resorted to looking to the requirements of
a time bound scheme”, only for the year 1993, the Supreme
Court held that the said procedure was not unfair. Moreover, the
Supreme Court upheld the procedure adopted in Arun Tiwari
(Supra) since at the relevant time, when the applications were
invited in that case, the earlier decision in Union of India v. N.
Hargopal,

AIR

1987

SC

1227

and

Deputy

Director

(Horticulture) Employees vs. Delhi Administration, Delhi ,
(1992)

4

SCC

99

were

in

vogue

and

the

decision

in

Malkapatnam (Supra) was pronounced only on 22nd August
1996, whereas the recruitment process in Arun Tiwari (Supra)
was undertaken in 1993. Secondly, Arun Tiwari (supra) is not
relevant for the reason that in the case of the respondent,
specific guidelines had already been circulated on 15.2.1999 i.e.
prior to the process undertaken by the respondents wherein the
petitioners claimed to have been selected, which even according
to the petitioner, took place in March-April 1999.
37.

In support of

his

proposition that the awarding of

lump sum marks by the interview Board was legal and justified,

W.P. (C) No. 5356/1999

Page 29 of 36

learned senior counsel for the petitioners relied upon n Madan
Lal and others vs. State of Jammu & Kashmir and others,
AIR 1995 SC 1088.

38.

In the guidelines dated 15th February 1999, it clearly

provides that the assessment of the candidates shall be made on
the following basis:

(a)

(b)

Higher/professional Qualifications 100 marks
where applicable.
(the points to be awarded out of
100 as per the %age or grade of
marks in the qualifying exam by
the candidate)

(c)

Professional experience.
100 marks
(wherever applicable)
20 marks will be awarded for
each year of experience. However
if the experience is for more than
5 years, 100 marks will be
awarded.

(d)

39.

Educational Qualifications
100 marks
(the points to be awarded out of
100 on the basis of the
percentage of grade of marks
obtained by the candidates)

Interview
including
practical 100 marks.
demonstration.
Each member will award the
marks and the final marks will be
awarded based upon average of
marks awarded by each member

Consequently, the guidelines themselves prescribe the

W.P. (C) No. 5356/1999

Page 30 of 36

different parameters that the Selection Board must take into
consideration while assessing the candidates, and the maximum
marks in respect of each of the parameters are also prescribed.
The members of Selection Board are therefore required to award
marks to the candidates being invited on these parameters.
Under

attribute

(d)

i.e.,

'interview

including

practical

demonstration' it clearly provides that each member will award
the marks and the final marks will be awarded based upon
average of marks awarded by each member. Consequently, each
member of the Selection Board ought to have awarded separate
marks for 'interview including practical demonstration' which
should then have been aggregated to arrive at the average.
However, this has admittedly not been done in the present case.
This procedure apparently was introduced to bring in objectivity
and transparency in the functioning of the Selection Board so
that the Selection remains fair and above board. The decision in
Madan Lal (supra) does not apply to the facts of the present case,
inasmuch,

as in that case the Supreme Court held that the

concerned rule regarding viva-voce test i.e. Rule 10(i)(b), which
lays down 'The object of viva-voce examination is to assess the
candidates'

intellegence,

general

knowledge,

personality,

aptitude and suitability', “does not provide for any separate
W.P. (C) No. 5356/1999

Page 31 of 36

assessment of marks for candidates at viva-voce examination
faculty wise, that is on intelligence, general knowledge, etc.,
listed in the said rule. On the contrary, it appears that as per
the said rule, while conducting the viva-voce examination the
Committee has to keep in view the main object of assessing such
candidate in the light of the guidelines given therein. In other
words, the interviewing committee has to keep in view the
overall performance of the candidates at the oral interview and
while doing so their intelligence, general knowledge, personality,
aptitude and suitability have to be kept in the centre. The rule
merely lays down the object of assessing such candidates in the
viva voce examination.

It is a general guideline given to the

interviewing committee members. Therefore, it is not possible to
agree with the submission of the senior counsel for the
petitioners that the members of the interview committee must
separately assess and give marks on different listed topics
faculty wise as per the said rule.”

40.

We also notice that the Supreme Court in Madan Lal

(Supra) distinguished the earlier decision in Peeriakaruppan &
Sobha Joseph v. State of Tamil Nadu and Ors., AIR 1971 SC
2303 which concerned admissions to the MBBS course in the

W.P. (C) No. 5356/1999

Page 32 of 36

State of Tamil Nadu. In Peeriakaruppan (Supra) the Supreme
Court had held that the Selection Committee ought to have
awarded separate marks for different attributes. In Madan Lal
(Supra) the Supreme Court held that since the Selection
Committee in Peeriakaruppan (Supra) was asked to award
marks on the basis of different attributes, namely, (1) Sports or
National Cadet Corps Activities; (2) Extra Curriculars Special
Services; (3) general physical condition and endurance; (4)
General ability and (5) Aptitude. The Selection Committee acted
illegally in awarding lump sum marks and not awarding marks
under the various heads itemwise. As aforesaid, in the present
case, the Selection Board was required under the guidelines, to
separately assess the candidates, inter-alia, for 'interview
including practical demonstration'. The present case is therefore
more akin to the fact situation in Peeriakaruppan (Supra) then
to the facts of Madan Lal (Supra).

41.

In view of our aforesaid discussion, we are of the view

that the respondents were entirely justified in cancelling the
Selection Process in question.

42.

Apart from the aforesaid reasons there are few other

reasons why we must decline any relief to the petitioners in the
W.P. (C) No. 5356/1999

Page 33 of 36

present case.

The respondent

clearly acted bonafide while

deciding to cancel the selection process altogether. It acted on
the basis of complaints, the consequent enquiry report and its
reasonable understanding of the judgment of the Supreme Court
in Malkapatnam (supra), and the breach of its guidelines dated
15.2.1999. The decision of the respondents in this regard cannot
be said to be unreasonable or arbitrary.

43.

Firstly, unless the decision of the respondent can be

said to be arbitrary or mala fide, their administrative decision to
scarp the selection process, which is based on the materials on
record, has to be respected and cannot be interfered with.

44.

Secondly, a candidate placed in the Select List has no

right to seek a claim for being appointed, particularly, when the
Select List is not operated at all and the entire selection process
has been quashed [see Union Territory of Chandigarh v.
Dilbagh Singh, (1993) 1 SCC 154; JT 2003 (4) SC 276].

A

recruitment process can be recalled by the Government at any
time

before

a

candidate

has

been

appointed.

Where

a

recruitment process is recalled or terminated on a policy
decision, a candidate participating therein has no right to get the
process completed. The decision may only be assailed on
W.P. (C) No. 5356/1999

Page 34 of 36

grounds of malafide or arbitrariness and the Government may be
called to justify its action on the touchstone of Article 14 of the
Constitution [see S.Prakash v. K.M.Kurian, 1999(5) SCC 624].
In the present case we do not find any malafide or arbitrariness
in the decision of the Respondents.

45.

Thirdly, in view of our discussion herein above, the

selection process in question was initiated in early 1990. About 8
years have already passed since then. In the meantime, there
would be hundreds if not thousands of other persons, who have
become eligible to participate in and get selected in a fresh
selection process. Even if the submissions of the petitioners were
to be accepted, based on their reading of Malkapatnam (Supra)
and Madan Lal (Supra) in our view, the respondents cannot be
directed not to hold the fresh selection process without operating
the previous selection panel or for placing the petitioners in the
interview stage of any fresh process or in a fresh list prepared,
for that would be inducting them via backdoor. This is clearly
impermissible

in

our

constitutional

scheme[see

Surendra

Prasad Tiwari v. Rajya Krishi Utpad Mandi Parishad, (2006)
7 SCC 684].

46.

For the reasons aforesaid, we see no merit in the

W.P. (C) No. 5356/1999

Page 35 of 36

petition and dismiss the same.

47.

No costs.
VIPIN SANGHI, J.

A.K. SIKRI, J.
September 24, 2007
P.K. BABBAR

W.P. (C) No. 5356/1999

Page 36 of 36

