*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

W.P(C) No. 1567 OF 2007
Judgment reserved on: August 06, 2007
Judgment delivered on: August 24, 2007

M/s. Renaissance Distilleries &
Breweries Ltd.
..... Petitioner
Through: Mr. Arvind Nigam with Mr.
Dinesh Kumar, Advocates.
versus
The Government of NCT of Delhi & Ors. ..... Respondent
Through: Ms. Avnish Ahalwat,
Advocate for respondent nos. 1 and 2.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

VIPIN SANGHI, J.
*
1.
The petitioner has filed this Writ Petition under Article
226 of the Constitution of India to seek a writ in the nature of
certiorari thereby quashing the acceptance letter dated 23rd
February 2007 issued by respondent No. 1 i.e. the Government of
NCT of Delhi to the private respondent No. 3 to 7 whereby the
W.P(C)1567-07

Page 1 of 22

said respondents have been granted the L-9/CLW-1 License for
the wholesale supply of Country Liquor in the National Capital
Territory of Delhi for the Licensing Year 2007-2008. The petitioner
has further sought a mandamus to direct respondent No. 1 to
accept the petitioner’s offer dated 5th February 2007 for grant of
L-9/CLW-1 license for the said Licensing year.
2.

In January 2007, Government of NCT of Delhi invited

tenders for grant of L-9/CLW-1 licenses for wholesale supply of
Country Liquor for the licensing year 2007-08. The notice inviting
tender issued by the Commercial-cum-Special Secretary of Excise
enumerated the documents which were to

accompany the

tenders. The bids were to be submitted by 1 PM on 5th February
2007. Amongst others, the following documents were also
required to be submitted alongwith their bids by the tenderers:
“ii) ‘No Dues Certificate in favour of the
tenderer issued by the Collector of Excise, Delhi,
after the date of this notice’.
x)
“No defaulter of dues of VAT Certificate
from the Trade and Tax Department of NCT of
Delhi.” (hereinafter referred to as the VAT
certificate).”
3.

Clause 6 of the NIT further stated that conditional

offers, offers without bank drafts of earnest money, other
documents, etc and offers which are not in the prescribed tender
form/document, will not be entertained and

W.P(C)1567-07

be summarily

Page 2 of 22

rejected. Tenders received after the stipulated date and time
were not to be entertained and were to be rejected.
4.

The petitioner submits that it obtained the “No Dues”

Certificate from the Excise Department, which was submitted
alongwith its bid. There were 11 other parties was participated in
the tender process. On 5.2.2007 when the tenders were opened,
the bid of the petitioner was found to be the lowest. It is stated
that the petitioner offered a bid of Rs.155.86 per case for 20% of
the quantity, whereas the next lower rate offered was Rs.162/per case.
5.

It is submitted that the respondent department, with a

view to bring down the rates through negotiations, called seven of
the bidders to attend the negotiation meeting vide letter dated
14.2.2007 to be held on 15.2.2007. Even though the petitioner’s
rates were the lowest, the petitioner was not called for
negotiations. It is asserted that the exclusion of the petitioner
from negotiation was unjustified and in violation of the CVC
Guidelines. As per the guidelines, first five tenderers i.e., L-1 to L5 ought to have been called for negotiations. The petitioner
represented against its exclusion on 15.2.2007 at 8.30 AM and
even approached the Finance Minister of Delhi State to redress its
grievance. It is further alleged that the Principal Secretary
(Finance), who was one of the members of the negotiating
W.P(C)1567-07

Page 3 of 22

Committee, informed the petitioner that the reason for non
consideration of the petitioner’s bid was the failure of the
petitioner to deposit the Value Added Tax (VAT) and produce the
VAT certificate. It is alleged that the Principal Secretary (Finance)
required the petitioner to give an undertaking that the unpaid
amount of VAT would be paid within 10 days and the petitioner
was further assured that he would be allowed to participate in the
negotiations to be held on the same day. Accordingly, the
petitioner states, it gave the undertaking. Despite the said
undertaking, the petitioner was not allowed to participate in the
negotiations. It is averred that in the meanwhile, the respondents
have negotiated and finalized the rate of Rs.162/- per case as
opposed to the petitioner’s offer of Rs.155.86 per case.
6.

The petitioner alleges that by accepting the higher rate

of Rs.162/- per case, the respondent authorities have, in fact,
caused

a

loss

to

the

State

Exchequer

to

the

tune

of

Rs.3,60,00,000/- in the Licensing year 2007-08. The action of the
respondent authorities is alleged to be opposed to public interest
apart from being arbitrary and illegal.
7.

Before us, the submission of the learned counsel for

the petitioner is that the requirement in the NIT of submission of
the VAT certificate is a non essential condition. It is argued that
the Excise Department had floated the tender notice under Rule
W.P(C)1567-07

Page 4 of 22

32 of the Delhi Liquor License Rules, 1976 (hereinafter referred to
as the Rules). Rule 32 of the Rules does not require submission of
the VAT certificate by the tenderers for grant of L-9/CLW-1 license
for wholesale supply of Country Liquor in the NCT of Delhi. In
contradistinction, that certificate is required to be submitted by a
tenderer who applies for grant of L-1 license for whole sale supply
of Indian Made Foreign Liquor (IMFL) brands in the NCT of Delhi by
virtue of Rule 31A of the Rules. Petitioner places reliance on
Poddar Steel Corporation V. Ganesh Engineering Works &
Ors.(1991) 3 SCC 273 in this regard.
8.

It is argued that there were no dues of Excise

outstanding against the petitioner on the date on which the
petitioner submitted its bid in response to the NIT in question and
certificate to that effect was also submitted by the petitioner. The
requirement of a VAT certificate was introduced for the first time
in the NIT in question, just to oust the petitioner from the bidding
process, as the respondent authorities knew that the petitioner
was a defaulter in payment of VAT. It is further argued that the
excise department of the Govt. of NCT of Delhi is not concerned
with the outstanding VAT liability of the bidders, since their only
outlook is the realisation of excise dues.
9.

The condition that the bidders should submit the VAT

certificate in effect means that bidders should have cleared their
W.P(C)1567-07

Page 5 of 22

VAT dues before the submission of their bids. The requirement of
submission of the VAT certificate by the bidders is merely to
establish the fact of clearance of VAT dues by the bidder upto the
date when the certificate is issued.
10.

Before we examine the petitioner’s submission that the

condition requiring submission of a VAT Certificate was not
essential, we may note that the petitioner has not, and could not
have challenged the prescription of the aforesaid clause 2(x) read
with clause 6 of the NIT, whereunder the bidders were required to
submit the said VAT Certificate, and it was stated that offers
without, inter-alia, the documents will not be entertained and be
summarily rejected. This is so in view of the decision of the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in Tata Cellular v. UOI, AIR 1996 SC 11.
While laying down the principles relating to the scope of judicial
review of administrative decisions and exercise of contractual
powers by government bodies, one of the principles deduced by
the court was that “The terms of the invitation to tender cannot
be open to judicial scrutiny because the invitation to tender is in
the realm of contract.” In the present case, the petitioner
participated in the tender process,

fully conscious of the

conditions of the NIT, which expressly in unequivocal terms
required the submission of the VAT certificate by the bidders and
stated that bids not accompanied with the requisite documents
W.P(C)1567-07

Page 6 of 22

would not be entertained and would be summarily rejected and is
now seeking to challenge the rejection of its bid by advancing its
own interpretation of the tender conditions.
11.

In our view, the petitioner ought to have agitated its

point of view in this petition even before participating in the
tender process, since it should have been obvious to the
petitioner that its bid would be rejected due to non-submission of
the VAT certificate. The petitioner cannot challenge the clear and
unambiguous terms of the NIT after having participated in the
tender process and failing to be considered therein on account of
the petitioner not fulfilling the said express condition. Reference
may be made to India Thermal Power Ltd. V. State of MP &
others, (2000) 3 SCC 379, paragraph 17 and M/s. New Bihar
Bidi Leaves Co. & others v. State of Bihar & Others., (1981)
1 SCC 537, Para 48). In our view, the challenge raised in this
petition must fail on this short ground.
12.

There can be no quarrel with the proposition that non-

essential or ancillary/subsidiary requirement in the NIT can and
ought to be waived. The test to determine whether a condition is
essential or collateral has been stated by the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in Kanhaiya Lal Aggarwal vs. UOI (2002) 6 SCC 315. It
says that whether a condition in a tender is essential or collateral
is to be ascertained by reference to the consequences of non
W.P(C)1567-07

Page 7 of 22

compliance thereof. If non-fulfillment of the requirement results in
rejection of tender, then it would be an essential part of the
tender otherwise it is only a collateral term.
13.

Therefore, in the light of the aforesaid position, we now

proceed to consider the primary submission of the petitioner that
the said condition is non essential, and the bid of the petitioner
could not have been overlooked on account of the non submission
of the VAT Certificate.
14.

Rule 32 of the Rules on which the petitioner places

reliance, lays down the procedure to be followed for the grant of,
inter-alia, L-9/CLW-1 license by the process of tender. The said
rule reads as follows:
“32. In case the licence is decided to be granted
by tender, the following procedure shall be
followed:
(1)

Tender for the grant of licences shall be
invited by the Excise Commissioner after
giving not less than 10 days’ notice
specifying inter-alia(a) The conditions to which the tender
will be subject;
(b) The number and situation of the
shops to be licensed on the basis of
tender where applicable;
(c) In the case of licences in Form L1A or L-9 the minimum and the
maximum quantity of liquor required
to be made available for sale either
during the currency of the licences or
during any specified shorter period or
periods.

W.P(C)1567-07

Page 8 of 22

(d) Any other information which in the
opinion of the Excise Commissioner
may be of use to the intending
bidders.
(2)

No tender shall be considered unless the
earnest money, as prescribed by the
Excise
Commissioner,
has
been
deposited in a Government Treasury or
State Bank of India in favour of the
Excise Commissioner or Bank Draft or
cash in currency notes is/are attached to
each other.

(3)

No tender shall be entertained from any
person whose name is on the black list
or who is otherwise debarred from
holding such licences.

(3A) Tenders may be invited for licence fees
or, in the case of licensees in Form L-9 or
L-1 A, for rates or prices at which the
licensee will supply liquor.
(4)

A tender shall specify the whole annual
licence fee and not the amount of the
monthly installment in which it is
payable.

(5)

A tender from a partnership or a firm
shall contain the names of all the
partners or the members of the firm, as
the case may be. No such tender shall
be entertained unless it is signed by all
the partners or the members and is
accompanied by an attested copy of the
partnership deed/firm’s constitution.
Such attestation shall be by an
Executive Magistrate or a Judicial
Magistrate of the first class.

(6)

The Excise Commissioner may, in his
discretion, reject any tender where, in
his opinion, the tender and/or any of his
partners have formed a pool tending to
create an undesirable monopoly of
interest.

W.P(C)1567-07

Page 9 of 22

(7)

The Excise Commissioner is not bound to
accept the highest tender or any tender
at all. When the highest tender is not
accepted, and a lower tender is
proposed to be accepted, the Excise
Commissioner shall record in writing his
reasons therefore. No tender shall be
accepted without the approval of the Lt.
Governor.

(7A)

If in the opinion of the Lieutenant
Governor, it is necessary for the purpose
of achieving uniformity in the rates, that
negotiations may be made with the
tenderers, he may for that purpose
appoint an officer or a committee of
officers to negotiate with the tenderers,
whose tenders are otherwise in orders.
Officer and the Committee shall then
negotiate with the tenderers in the
ascending order of the tender rates but
no tenders shall have a vested right to
be called for such negotiations. The
negotiations made by the officer or the
committee of officers shall be subject to
the final decision of the Lt. Governor.

(8)

The deposits made by unsuccessful
tenderers shall be refunded to them.

(9)

(i) Where tenders have been invited for
licence fee, the successful tenderer
whose tender has been accepted by the
Excise Commissioner, shall pay onefourth of the amount quoted by him plus
an amount equal to six months
estimated assessed fee in case of
licences for foreign liquor within such
time as may be fixed by the Excise
Commissioner while communicating the
decision about the acceptance of the
tender to him. The earnest money
deposited by him shall be adjusted
towards the satisfaction of dues payable
by him as aforesaid or as security
amount wherever such security is
provided.

W.P(C)1567-07

Page 10 of 22

(ii) Any person whose tender is
accepted, whether for licence fee or for
rates, shall take all requisite action to
complete all formalities required for
grant of a licence within seven days from
the
date
of
communication
of
acceptance of his tender and if he does
not do so, all deposits made by him shall
stand forfeited to the Government and,
while the licence may be re-tendered or
granted in any other manner, he shall
not be entitled to any compensation.
(10) (i) If any person, whose tender has been
accepted, fails to make the deposits
one-fourth of annual fee (plus an amount
equal to six months estimated assessed
fee in case of licence for foreign liquor)
or if he refuses to accept the licence, the
Excise Commissioner may call for fresh
tenders, or any deficiency in fee arising
as a result thereof together with all
expenses incurred in inviting tenders
shall be recoverable from the defaulting
tenderer in the manner laid down in
Section 60 of the Punjab Excise Act,
1914 has in force in the Union Territory
of Delhi.
(ii) It shall also be lawful for the Excise
Commissioner to forfeit the earnest
money of the defaulting tenderer either
in part or in full, deposited by the said
tenderer.
(11) Where tenders have been invited for
licence fee, a licensee shall, by the 7th of
the month in which he begins his
business
under
his
licence
and
th
thereafter by the 7 of every subsequent
month, pay in advance one-twelfth of
the annual fee till the whole fee is paid.
The one-fourth advance paid under subrule (2) shall be adjusted at close of the
year. He may, however, at any time, pay
the whole amount due, if he so wishes.
W.P(C)1567-07

Page 11 of 22

(12) Where
tender
money
exceeds
Rs.1,00,000, it shall be a multiple of
Rs.5,000/- and for lesser amount it shall
be multiple of Rs.500/-.
(13) Where tenders have been invited for
licence fee, if the Excise Commissioner is
of the opinion that no suitable tender is
forthcoming, he shall, with the previous
–
Sanction of the Lt. Governor, resell the
licence by auction.
(14) If it is not considered expedient to
accept the highest or the lowest tender,
as the case may be, the Excise
Commissioner shall refer the matter to
the Lt. Governor as to whether(a) The licence be auctioned; or
(b) The shop to which the licence
relates be closed either permanently
or till a person willing to take it up at
the minimum fee comes forward; or
(c)The vend in, the shop to which the
licence relates be carried on by a
vendor who may be paid commission
on sales.
(15) When a licence has been cancelled, the
Collector may resell it by public auction
or by inviting fresh tenders or by private
contract and any deficiency in fee and
all expenses of such resale or attempted
resale shall be recoverable from the
defaulting licensee in the manner laid
down in Section 60 of the Punjab Excise
Act, 1914, as in force in the Union
Territory of Delhi. The Collector shall
communicate the result of such resale in
a statement, in duplicate to the Excise
Commissioner. If the amount realized
from the original licensee including the
initial deposit of one-fourth of the annual
fee and the amount bid by the incoming
W.P(C)1567-07

Page 12 of 22

licensee together are less than the
amount previously tendered by the
original licensee together with the
expenses incurred, if any, in connection
with resale, the deficiency, shall be
recovered from the original licensee. If
these amounts together are more than
the amounts previously tendered, no
refund shall be made to the original
licensee.”
15.

The submission of the petitioner is that the said rule

prescribes the various conditions to be complied with by the
tenderers while submitting their bids for the grant of, inter-alia, L9/CLW-1 license. However, there is no requirement for submission
of a VAT Certificate. It is argued that the conditions prescribed in
the NIT, which are not statutorily prescribed in Rule 32, cannot be
insisted upon, or become a basis for rejection of the bid at the
threshold.
16.

We cannot agree with the submission of the petitioner.

Rule 32 lays down the procedure to be followed for grant of, interalia, the L-9/CLW-1 license through the tender process. It states
that the tender is to be invited by Excise Commissioner, by giving
not

less

than

10

days

notice

specifying,

inter-alia,

‘the

conditions to which the tender will be subject’. The Rule
does not lay down the conditions by themselves, to which the
tender may be subject and leaves it to the Excise Commissioner
to specify those conditions. It is in the exercise of the said power,
that the Excise Commissioner issued the NIT in question
W.P(C)1567-07

Page 13 of 22

containing, inter-alia, clause 2(x) as aforesaid. If the submission of
the petitioner were to be accepted, it would mean that even the
other conditions were not essential and could not be insisted upon
for compliance by respondents authorities. These conditions,
inter-alia, require submission of :“(i) “No Dues Certificate” in favour of the
tenderer issued by the Collector of Excise,
Delhi after the date of this Notice.
(ii) An affidavit, duly attested by a
Magistrate declaring that the information
given in the tender form is true and correct
and that no fact has been concealed
therefrom.
(iii) True attested copy of the valid distillery
licence or bottling plant licence issued by the
Competent Authority.
(iv) Documents showing the permitted
installed capacity for the manufacture of
country liquor.
(v)
Statement
indicating
the
actual
production and supply of country liquor
during the last five years, duly authenticated
by the concerned Excise Commissioner of the
State in which the distillery/bottling plant is
situated.
(vi) “No Dues and Credibility” certificate
regarding past performance of production
and supply from the Excise Commissioner of
the State in which the distillery/bottling unit
is situated.
(vii) Consent of the Excise Commissioner
the State where distillery/bottling plant
situated for supply of spirit from that State
the national Capital Territory of Delhi
W.P(C)1567-07

of
is
of
in
Page 14 of 22

which the capacity of the distillery/bottling
plant should be clearly mentioned.
(viii) A statement indicating the maximum
quantity of country liquor that can be
supplied to Delhi by the tenderer from each
its units.”
17.

Without the aforesaid information, the respondent

authorities cannot even be expected to take a rational decision on
the competence and suitability of the various bidders.
18.

The grant of licenses under the Rules can be by the

process of auction, or through the tendering process. While Rule
32 prescribes the procedure for tendering, Rule 31 prescribes the
procedure for auctioning of the licenses. The Excise Commissioner
is entitled to specify, inter-alia, the conditions to which the
auction will be subject [Rule 31(2)(a)]. Rule 31(4)(b) lays down
the details of the documents that are required to be furnished by
the bidders at the auction. Clause (vii) of the said sub-rule is
relevant, and the same reads as follows:
“31.(4)

No person shall be allowed to bid for a

licence unlessa) … … …
b) He has furnished the following documents:
i)

……

ii)

………

iii)

………

W.P(C)1567-07

…

Page 15 of 22

iv)

………

v)

………

vi)

………

vii)

19.

A no due certificate from the appropriate
assessing authority if the intending bidder is or
is interested in the business of a dealer
registered under the Delhi Sales Tax Act, 1975
in respect of dues realisable under the Sales
Tax laws in force in Delhi upto the last date of
the preceding the date of the auction for which
such dealer has been assessed;”
Firstly, we may notice that the language of Rule 31(4)

begins with a peremptory clause. Therefore, for the purpose of
being eligible for participating in an auction for acquiring licenses
under the Rules, the bidders have to comply with the conditions
specified in Rule 31(4).

It does not stand to reason that the

condition requiring furnishing of the documents specified in Rule
31(4) is mandatory for purpose of granting licences by the
process of auction, and not by the process of tendering. Rule 31
applies to all licences under the Rules, including L-9 licenses.
20.

Counsel for the respondent submits that the aforesaid

submissions of the petitioner are also in the teeth of The Delhi
Intoxicants License and Sale Rules, 1976 (hereinafter referred to
as the Intoxicants Rules) framed under the Punjab Excise Act,
1914 as applicable to Delhi. Under Rule 7 of the Intoxicants Rules,
it is mandated that a license for the vend of liquor and/or drugs
shall not be given to, inter-alia, “any person interested in the
W.P(C)1567-07

Page 16 of 22

business of any firm registered under the Law relating to Sales
Tax in Delhi, and dealing in any intoxicant if such firm is
defaulter of dues under the said law.”
21.

Explanation appended to Rule 7 enlarges the scope of

the said restriction. It reads as follows :
“For the purposes of this rule. “person interested
in the business of the holder of a licensee or a
firm” includes every person interested in such
business as a member, director, partner or
agent.”
22.

We may note that the VAT is imposed in lieu of Sales

Tax and consequently the said provisions clearly bars the grant of
license to a defaulter of tax in the nature of the Sales Tax, which
is now called VAT. To this, the submission of the petitioner is that
Rule 7 of the Intoxicants Rules does not apply to liquor licences
for wholesale supply, and that it applies only to a licence for a
“vend”. It is contended that the L-9/CLW-1 licence in question is
not a licence for a “vend of liquor.”

The submission of the

petitioner that the expression “vend” connotes only a retail shop
and does not cover wholesale licence operations does not appear
to be correct. A perusal of the Rules, such as Rule 34(11) shows
that the Rules also describe the L-9 licence as one “for the
wholesale vend of country liquor.”

Similarly, Rule 1, which

describes the class of licences that may be granted and renewed
by the authorities, describes the licence in Form L-9 as “wholesale

W.P(C)1567-07

Page 17 of 22

vend of country liquor.”

The express “vend” is therefore more

generally used so as to mean “to sell”. It does not mean a retail
vend only.

Even if the submission of the petitioner, that the

Intoxicant Rules do not apply to L-9 licences is assumed to be
correct, without going into the question whether the Intoxicants
Rules squarely apply to a wholesale vend licensee holding a L9/CLW-1 licence or not, what can be said is that the clearance of
the VAT dues is an essential condition for grant of a retail liquor
vend.

If this is so, it does not stand to reason why a similar

condition cannot be prescribed by the Excise commissioner in the
NIT issued for granting L-9/CLW-1 licence for a wholesale vend of
country liquor.

There was, therefore, sufficient guideline and

justifications for the Excise Commissioner to lay down clause 2(x)
in the NIT in question, in exercise of his power under Rule
32(1)(a).

The

argument

based

on

Rule

31A

is

therefore

misconceived and is rejected.
23.

In the present case, clause 6 of the NIT clearly stated

that offers without the “other documents etc. and offers, which
are not in the prescribed tender form/document, will not be
entertained and summarily rejected.”

The “other documents”

referred to, necessarily relate to the documents enumerated in
clause 2 of the said NIT. Consequently, clause 2(x) which requires

W.P(C)1567-07

Page 18 of 22

the submission of the VAT certificate by the bidders is an
essential condition, which could not be waived.
24.

We also cannot accept the submission of the petitioner

that since the tender in question is floated by the Excise
Department of Government of NCT of Delhi, which has no concern
with the outstanding dues of VAT, said condition could not have
been imposed in the NIT, and therefore it should be read as a
non-essential condition.
25.

It is well known that there is no fundamental right to

manufacture or trade in liquor and other noxious items in view of
their ill effects on the society. The State still grants licenses for
manufacture and trade in liquor primarily to generate revenue for
the State. Even VAT is a tax levied and collected by the State to
enhance its revenue which is needed by the State to run the
administration and carry out its obligations. It is therefore wrong
to contend that the State, while acting through one of its limbs i.e.
the excise department cannot prescribe a condition that the
applicant for a liquor license should have no outstanding sales
tax/VAT dues. Even otherwise, the State is not obliged to deal
with a person who may be a defaulter in payment of taxes. A
defaulter in payment of one kind of tax can be reasonably
assumed to have the propensity to conduct itself in the same
manner in relation to other similar liabilities in future. The State
W.P(C)1567-07

Page 19 of 22

can choose not to deal with such a defaulter. In our view, there is
nothing unreasonable about it.
26.

From the above discussion, it follows that the condition

prescribed in the NIT in question under clause 2(x), is in fact an
eligibility condition and since the petitioner did not fulfill the
same, he had no right to be considered in the tender process in
question. When the bid of the petitioner was opened, the
shortcoming in its bid and its ineligibility was discovered. If the
respondent authorities are directed to entertain the petitioner's
bid, it would lead to denial of opportunity to others similarly
circumstanced, who might have been interested in submitting
their bids for the tender in question, and who did not do so on
account of, inter-alia, condition No. 2(x) in the NIT. This is another
reason why we find no merit in this petition. (See G.J. Fernandez
Vs. State of Karnataka, 1990 (2) SCC 488; R.D. Shetty vs.
Airport Authority of India, AIR 1979 SC 1628).
27.

In our view, the bid of the petitioner was rightly not

considered by the respondent. The argument of the petitioner
that he was the lowest bidder and that the State Exchequer would
have gained additional revenue of Rs.3.6 crores for the year in
question had its bid been accepted, though attractive, is without
any merit. Since the petitioner was not eligible, and its bid was
non-responsive, the rates offered by the petitioner are of no
W.P(C)1567-07

Page 20 of 22

consequences and cannot be looked at for any purposes. Pre
qualification/eligibility conditions are essential conditions, non
fulfillment of which result in the rejection of the tender. (See G.J.
Fernandez (Supra); Kanhaiya Lal Aggarwal (supra)). The
tender conditions must be adhered to and followed by the bidders
scrupulously. We may only refer to the decisions of the Hon’ble
Supreme Court in W.B. State Electricity Board vs. Patel
Engineering (2001) 2 SCC 451
28.

To satisfy ourselves, we had asked the respondents to

produce the relevant departmental file. We have gone through
the same and do not find any irregularity in the award of the
licences to the private respondents @ Rs.162/- per case.

The

negotiation committee had first called M/s. Queen Distt & Bottlers
(P) Ltd for negotiation, since it had quoted a rate of Rs.162/- per
case, which was the lowest valid bid. He justified the quoted rate
and did not agree to bring it down any further on the ground that
import of ethanol/industrial alcohol from Brazil had stopped.
Consequently, the rates of molases and rectified spirit in the
domestic market had gone up and he stated that the rates may
go up further in the coming months, in view of the mandatory use
of ethanol to the extent of 5% in petrol all over India. It is noticed
that while a few other bidders agreed at the time of negotiation to
reduce their rates to Rs.162/- per case, two of the bidders even
W.P(C)1567-07

Page 21 of 22

refused to reduce their quote rates of Rs.167/- per case and
Rs.167.50 per case of country liquor.

Consequently, they were

not awarded any quantity for supply and all the suppliers, after
negotiations, agreed to supply at the rate of Rs.162/- per case.
From this it appears that the rate accepted by the respondents
was not excessive and there seems to be no irregularity in the
award of the L-9 licences by the respondent authorities.
29.

In view of the aforesaid we find no merit in the petition

and dismiss the same.

VIPIN SANGHI, J.

A.K.SIKRI, J.
August 24, 2007
P.K. BABBAR

W.P(C)1567-07

Page 22 of 22

