*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

IA.Nos.8431-33/06, 1178/06, 6197/06 in
CS (OS) No. 1130/2006
Judgment reserved on: 2nd February, 2007

%

Judgment delivered on: 24th April, 2007
Mrs. Sushma Thadani
Through:

.....
Plaintiff
Mr. Sudhanshu Batra,
Advocate, with Mr. Atul
Bhatia, Advocate

versus
Mr. Yatish Kumar Satija & Another
..... Defendants
Through: Mr. Dinesh Garg, Adv. for
defendant No.2.
CORAM
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

VIPIN SANGHI, J.
1.

By this common order, I propose to deal with the aforesaid

applications. Parties have addressed common arguments.
2.

The plaintiff is the daughter while defendant no.1 is the

son of late Lt. Col.Ram Krishna Satija and late Smt. Bimla Satija. Late
Lt. Col. Ram Krishan Satija was admittedly the owner of the suit
property bearing No.B-44, Defence Colony, New Delhi.
CS (OS) No.1130/2006

He had

Page No. 1 of 24

acquired the leasehold rights in respect of the suit property vide
perpetual lease deed dated 3.6.1978.

Lt. Col. R. K. Satija expired on

25.2.1991. The mother of the plaintiff and defendant no.1 thereafter
passed away on 15.2.1995.
3.

The plaintiff avers that she has been in occupation of the

first floor, barsati and the garage block of the suit property and that
she has been residing with her family and parents therein since the
year 1971.

The ground floor of the property was let out to tenants

even during the lifetime of the father.

It is claimed that defendant

no.1 never resided on the ground floor of the property, since he was
permanently residing in Mumbai and is engaged in his shipping
business. After the death of the mother, the ground floor was let out
and defendant no.1 was receiving the rents from the said letting.
4.

It is averred that late Lt. Col. R. K. Satija executed a

registered Will on 8.2.1982 (herein referred to as the 'Will') and
bequeathed the property in dispute to the plaintiff and defendant no.1.
It is further stated that the plaintiff got the first floor and the barsati
floor whereas defendant no.1 got the entire ground floor of the suit
property.

It is further stated that on 13.10.1993 the plaintiff and

defendant no.1 applied for mutation of the suit property in their joint
names on the basis of the registered Will dated 8.2.1982 left by their
father. The MCD mutated the suit property in favour of plaintiff and
defendant no.1 on 3.7.1995. It is further stated that the parties got

CS (OS) No.1130/2006

Page No. 2 of 24

the leasehold rights converted to free hold in joint names and for that
purpose, defendant no.1 took away the title documents.
expenses for conversion were
defendant no.1.

The

also borne by both the plaintiff and

On 7.3.2005, the conversion of the property took

place and a conveyance deed was executed jointly in the names of
plaintiff and defendant no.1.
5.

It is further stated that in the month of May, 2005 the

ground floor of the property was vacated by the tenant. Plaintiff states
that defendant no.1 desired to induct only a foreigner as a new tenant.
Since that did not happen, the ground floor remained vacant.

It is

claimed that in December, 2005, defendant no.1 suggested to the
plaintiff that the suit property be sold to a builder, or in the alternative
suggested that the plaintiff sell her share to defendant no.1. However
the plaintiff was not interested to sell the suit property. It is further
claimed that defendant no.1 vide letter dated 15.2.2006 asked the
plaintiff to vacate the garage portion. Defendant no.1 took the keys of
the ground floor from the plaintiff and thereafter refused access to the
plaintiff to the backyard where the plaintiffs water meter, water tank
and the water pump are installed.

It is claimed that on 17.5.2006,

defendant nos. 1 and 2 came to the property and on 18.5.2006, a few
strangers came and occupied the ground floor of the suit property.
The strangers appeared to be anti social elements brought only to
threaten the plaintiff and to put pressure upon her to sell her portion.

CS (OS) No.1130/2006

Page No. 3 of 24

6.

In paragraph 35, it is stated that the plaintiff and

defendant no.1 are co-owners of the suit property and that the suit
property had not been divided by metes and bounds and hence the
defendant no.1 has no right to sell and/or create any third party
interest in the suit property.
7.

The plaintiff filed this suit claiming a decree of restraint

against defendant no.1 from selling and/or creating any third party
interest in the ground floor of the suit property, and at the same time
also claimed a decree of restraint against defendant no.2 from
entering the ground floor portion of the suit property.

Decree was

also sought in the nature of a mandatory injunction directing
defendant nos 1 and 2 to either hand over the keys of the back door
of the ground floor of the suit property, or to provide duplicate keys
thereof to the plaintiff.
8.

The suit came up before the court on 24.5.2006 when this

Court issued summons to the defendants and also passed an ex parte
ad interim order of injunction restraining defendant no.1 from selling,
transferring or creating any third party rights in the property or
transferring the possession of any portion of the property to any
person.

The Court also took notice of the averments made by the

plaintiff that the plaintiff has a preferential right in the property and
that till the property is partitioned, there is unity of possession and
therefore the defendant cannot claim exclusive possession of any

CS (OS) No.1130/2006

Page No. 4 of 24

portion of the property, nor can he transfer any portion of the property
to any one.
9.

Defendant no.1 entered appearance and filed his written

statement dated 22.7.2006. In his written statement, defendant no.1
stated that the suit is not maintainable and liable to be dismissed
since defendant no.1 had already sold the ground floor of the suit
property on 17.5.2006 to a company called Citi-Mates Builders &
Promoters (P) Ltd., vide a registered sale deed. It was stated that the
suit had become infructuous since the physical possession of the
ground floor of the suit property had also been delivered to the
vendee on 17.5.2006 itself. Defendant no.1 stated that since he was
residing in Mumbai, he was not able to manage his portion of the suit
property and he had even offered the plaintiff to buy his share but the
plaintiff pleaded lack of funds.

Defendant no.1 therefore had no

option but to sell his portion of the property, which he accordingly sold
to the said vendee.
10.

The plaintiff, faced with this situation, moved applications

under Order 1 Rule 10 C.P.C (IA No.8432/06) for impleading M/s. Citi
Mates Builders & Promoters Pvt. Ltd, the purchasers of the ground
floor of suit property and under Order 6 Rule 17 C.P.C (I.A.No.8431/06)
for amendment of the plaint seeking amendment by substitution and
insertion of new averments and introduction of a new prayer clause in
the plaint.

CS (OS) No.1130/2006

Page No. 5 of 24

11.

The case now sought to be set up by the plaintiff is that a

limited estate in the suit property was created by the 'Will' in favour
of the mother of the plaintiff (proposed para 13).

The mother died

intestate and the property devolved upon the plaintiff and defendant
No.1 as co-owners (proposed para 14A).

A pre-emptory right to

purchase the share of defendant no.1 is now sought to be made as a
ground to seek a declaration of invalidity of the sale concluded on
17.5.2006 by defendant no.1 in favour of M/s. Citi Makes Builders &
Promoters Pvt. Ltd (proposed para 35). By proposed paras 36 to 41 the
plaintiff is seeking to include averments as to events/matters which
have occurred/have been discovered after the filing of the instant suit.
The proposed paras 42 to 44 pertain to the additional relief(s), which
as per the plaintiff, she is now entitled to. Para 45 contains averments
as to the cause of action and when it arose. Para 46 pertains to the
averment in relation to the jurisdiction and court fee.
12.

The defendant No.1 has filed reply to the application for

amendment of the plaint.

He has opposed the application on the

ground that the plaintiff is, by the proposed amendments seeking to
alter the nature of the entire suit by setting up a new case in order to
defeat the stand taken by the defendant in his written statement. The
counsel for the defendant further argued that the plaintiff cannot be
permitted to withdraw her own admissions with respect to the mode of
devolution of the suit property, or the factum of physical division of

CS (OS) No.1130/2006

Page No. 6 of 24

the suit property between the plaintiff and defendant no.1 by virtue of
the “Will” of their father, by these amendments.
13.

The defendant No.2 has also raised similar objections.

14.

Though no explicit averments are sought to be made to

this effect, during the course of arguments the plaintiff submitted that
since, according to the plaintiff a life estate or a limited estate was
created under the will dated 8.2.1982 in favour of her mother, by
virtue of Section 14(1) of the Hindu Succession Act, (for short `the
Act'), the same blossomed into a full estate. Thus, the suit property
devolved upon the plaintiff and defendant No.1 by way of ordinary law
of intestate succession through their mother in accordance with
Section 15 of the Act, and not in the manner specified in the Will.
15.

The plaintiff in support of its amendment application

contended that the dispute is in relation to the construction of the Will.
The averments in the plaint with regard to the effect of the Will are
averments of law and not of fact. If the Hindu Succession Act provides
otherwise, then the statements/averment made in the original plaint,
cannot be taken as admissions or constitute estoppel.
16.

In support of the case now sought to be introduced by the

plaintiff, she refers to the following extract from the Will dated
8.2.1982 left by her father:
“But my said children shall have no right to dispose
of the property without the permission of my wife
Smt. Bimla Satija who will take posession of the
entire house after my death and will be entitled to
CS (OS) No.1130/2006

Page No. 7 of 24

recover the entire rental income of the house.”
The plaintiff has relied upon the Supreme Court decision in

17.

Gulwant Kaur and another Vs. Mohinder Singh and others
(1987)

3

SCC

674.

Reliance

is

also

placed

on

Thota

Sesharathamma and another Vs. Thota Manikyamma(Dead) by
Lrs and others (1991) 4 SCC 312; C.Masilamani Mudaliar & Ors
vs.

The

Idol

of

Sri

Thirukoli and Others

Swaminathaswami

Swaminathaswami

AIR 1996 SC 1697 and on Mangat Mal

(Dead) and Another vs.

Smt. Punni Devi (Dead) & Ors., AIR

1996 SC 172.
18.

The defendants on the other hand contend that the suit

property came in the hands of the plaintiff and defendant no.1 under
the 'Will' which specifically allocates ground floor to defendant no.1
and the first floor to the plaintiff, and there was no question of their
interest in the property being undivided. They further contend that
though some interest in the property was created in favour of the
mother of the plaintiff by the 'Will' dated 8.2.1982 for her life time, the
bequest would be squarely covered by Section 14(2) of Hindu
Succession Act since the 'Will' for the first time created only a
limited/life estate in favour of mother of the plaintiff and defendant
no.1, and there is no claim of any pre-existing right in her favour in the
suit property which could have blossomed into a full estate by virtue of
Section 14 (1) of the said Act. Reliance is placed by the defendants
upon the recent decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Sadhu
CS (OS) No.1130/2006

Page No. 8 of 24

Singh vs. Gurudwara Sahib Narike & Ors., JT 2006 (8) SC 525.
19.

In my view, in the absence of any dispute, that the mother

of the plaintiff had no preexisting interest in the suit property, (since
there is no pleadings or proposed pleadings claiming that the mother
had a preexisting interest in the suit property), and in absence of any
dispute with regard to the existence of the 'Will' in question, the
manner of devolution of interest in suit property by the 'Will' dated
8.2.1982 is a pure question of law. The parties have also addressed
their arguments on the aforesaid undertaking. Moreover, if the stand
now sought to be taken by the plaintiff is found not to be tenable in
law, it cannot be permitted to be now introduced by way of
amendment. Under Order 6 Rule 16 CPC, pleadings made may be
struck out if they are scandalous, frivolous or vexatious. This is to
ensure that a litigation which is meaningless and bound to prove
abortive, should not be permitted to occupy the time of the court and
cause embarassment to the opposite party. [See Sathi Vijay Kumar
v. Tota Singh 2006 (14) SCALE 199]. Pleadings based on a legal
proposition which is erroneous should be struck off. Consequently,
amendments which are obviously vexatious, frivolous or obviously
unsustainable ought not to be permitted on the same principle in the
interest of justice.

Thus, the application seeking amendment of the

plaint can be disposed of on the basis of an answer to the question, as
to whether, under the 'Will' the mother of the Plaintiff and Defendant

CS (OS) No.1130/2006

Page No. 9 of 24

No.1, acquired the suit property by application of Section 14(1) of the
Act, or the case falls under Section 14(2) of the Act.
20.

Section 14 of the Hindu Succession Act reads as follows :
“(1)Any property possessed by a female
Hindu, whether acquired before or after the
commencement of this Act, shall be held
by her as full owner thereof and not as a
limited owner.
Explanation
–
In
this
sub-section,
“property” includes both movable and
immovable property acquired by a female
Hindu by inheritance or devise, or at a
partition, or in lieu of maintenance or
arrears of maintenance, or by gift from any
person, whether a relative or not, before,
at or after her marriage, or by her own skill
or exertion, or by purchase or by
prescription, or in any other manner
whatsoever, and also any such property
held by her as stridhana immediately
before the commencement of this Act.
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1)
shall apply to any property acquired by
way of gift or under a will or any other
instrument or under a decree or order of a
civil court or under an award where the
terms of the gift, will or other instrument or
the decree, order or award prescribe a
restricted estate in such property.“

21.

A three judge Bench of the Apex Court in Mst. Karmi Vs.

Amru and others, AIR 1971 SC 745, speaking through Justice Hegde
held that the life estate given to a Hindu woman (in that case by a
husband to his widow) under a Will cannot become an absolute estate
under the provisions of the Hindu Succession Act.

CS (OS) No.1130/2006

Page No. 10 of 24

22.

A similar view was expressed in G. Appaswami Chettiar

& Anr. v. R. Sarngapani Chettiar & Ors.,

AIR 1978 SC 1051

wherein it was observed that when a female Hindu gets a property
under a Will, Section 14(2) of the Act would be applicable and the life
estate would not be enlarged into an absolute estate.
23.

In Bhura and others Vs. Kanshi Ram, AIR 1994 SC

1202 this proposition was once again reiterated in the following words
:“The recitals in the Will (Ex.P-4) go to show
that the testator wanted to provide his
daughter, Sarjabai interest in the estate but
at the same time intended that the property
should ultimately be retained in his family for
which purpose, he was soon to take
Gopichand in adoption and was also hopeful
of begetting a natural son through one of his
wives. ......
The bequeath in favour of
Sarjabai (as extracted above) clearly speaks
of the testator's intention of only creating a
life interest in her and nothing more and the
various expressions used therein are
indicative of and are reconcilable only with
the hypothesis that the testator was creating
an estate in favour of Sarjabai only for her
lifetime and not an absolute estate. We,
therefore, agree with the High Court that
under the Will Sarjabai did not get more than
a lifetime estate because the language of the
Will is inconsistent with her having got an
absolute right over the land.
6. The limited estate conferred upon Sarjabai
by the Will (W.P.4) could not even be
enlarged into an absolute estate under the
Hindu Succession Act, 1956, even though
she was possessed of that property at the
CS (OS) No.1130/2006

Page No. 11 of 24

time of the coming into force of the Hindu
Succession Act, 1956. S.14(2) of the Act
mandates that nothing contained in sub-sec.
(1) of S. 14 of the Hindu Succession Act,
1956 shall apply to any property acquired by
way of gift or under a Will or by any other
instrument prescribing a restricted right in
such property. In view of our finding that the
Will (Ex.P.4) itself prescribed a restricted
right or life estate in the property in favour of
Sarjabai, that estate could not be enlarged
into an absolute estate in view of the express
provisions of the Hindu Succession Act,
1956“
24.

I may now refer to the judgments cited by the plaintiff to

contend that the case is covered by Section 14(1) and not Section
14(2) of the Act .
25.

In Gulwant Kaur (supra), the Apex court was dealing with

the case of a female Hindu who had been allotted certain lands in lieu
of maintenance by her husband during his lifetime which lands were
later on sold by her husband to the respondent. The Court held that
the land was given to the appellant in lieu of maintenance by husband
and when a female Hindu is put in possession of property pursuant to,
or in recognition of a right to maintenance, the limited right given to
her gets enlarged to a full ownership under Section 14(1) of the Act.
The Court also defined sub-section (2) to section 14 as an exception
to sub-section (1) which comes into operation when property is
acquired by a female Hindu under a gift or will or any instrument etc,
conferring a restricted estate and where the acquisition is not
traceable to any antecedent right.
CS (OS) No.1130/2006

Page No. 12 of 24

26.

The ratio of the said case is that only where property is

given in lieu of maintenance, arrears of maintenance and in
recognition of pre-existing right, the provisions of Section 14 (1) of the
Act would be applicable and Section 14(2) applies where the property
is acquired under an instrument for the first time and the acquisition
cannot be traced or is not based on any antecedent right to hold that
property. Since it is not the plaintiffs case that her mother had any
preexisting right in the suit property, prior to the coming into
operation of the Will, this decision does not advance the case now
sought to be set up by the plaintiff.
27.

In Thota Sesharathamma and Another(supra), it was

held that a life estate granted to a Hindu woman by a `Will' would
become her absolute estate if she was already in possession of the
property as a limited owner and the Will recognised the pre-existing
right in her favour.
28.

I may notice that in this case, the Hon'ble Supreme Court

made an observation that the decision in Mst. Karmi(supra) was a
short judgment, without adverting to the provisions of Section 14(1)
and 14(2) of the Act. The judgment neither makes any mention of any
argument made in this regard, nor is there any mention of the earlier
decision in Badri Pershad Vs. Smt. Kanso Devi, (1969)2 SCC 586.
It was held that the decision in Mst. Karmi (supra) cannot be
considered as an authority on the ambit and scope of section Section

CS (OS) No.1130/2006

Page No. 13 of 24

14(1) and 14(2) of the Act.
29.

The

aforesaid

observation

to

my

mind,

does

not

tantamount to the decision in Mst. Karmi (supra) being overruled.
Pertinently, the Hon'ble Supreme Court itself notices that two of the
Hon'ble Judges that decided Badri Pershad (supra) viz., Shah J. and
Grover J. were also on the Bench that decided Mst Karmi (supra).
The Decision in Badri Pershad (supra), in any event, was a decision
rendered in a different fact situation. In that case, the widow had been
put in possession of the property under a decree which gave her a
limited/ life estate. That decree was in recognition of her right to be
maintained out of the property. In those circumstances, the Hon'ble
Court had held that upon coming into operation of the Act, by the
Application of Section 14(1). the life estate blossomed into a full
estate.
30.

However, the facts in Mst. Karmi (supra) were materially

different. In Mst. Karmi (supra) the Husband had executed a 'will' in
favour of his widow giving her a life estate in the year 1937, and
thereafter he died in 1938. The question was, whether upon coming
into force of the Act, the life estate blossomed into a full estate under
S.14(1) or it remained a life estate, and the collaterals-beneficiaries
under the 'will' succeeded to the property upon the demise of the
widow. The Supreme Court answered the question by holding that the
life estate of the Widow did not get enlarged into an absolute

CS (OS) No.1130/2006

Page No. 14 of 24

ownership under the provisions of the Act.
31.

It is a settled proposition of law that a case is authority on

only what it decides. A decision often takes colour from the question
involved in the case in which it is rendered. The only thing binding as
an authority upon a subsequent judge is the principle upon which the
case was decided.(see AIR 2003 SC 4172)
32.

Consequently, I am of the view that the decision in Mst.

Karmi(supra) cannot be disregarded. It is settled that the law laid
down by the Supreme Court in a decision delivered by a Bench of
Larger strength is binding on any subsequent Bench of lesser or
coequal strength (See (2004) 1 SCC 681; 1999 SC 1958; 2005(2)
SCC

673).

Both

Mst.

Karmi

(supra)

and

Thotha

Sesharathamma(supra) are decisions of Co-equal strength. At the
cost of repetition I may state that, in any case, the decision in Mst.
Karmi (supra) was not overruled by the Supreme Court in Thotha
Sesharathammma (supra). Moreover, in its later decision in Sadhu
Singh (supra), relied upon by the defendants, the Hon'ble Supreme
Court has in fact, relied upon Mst. Karmi (supra).
33.

This decision is, therefore, of little assistance to the

plaintiff's case.
34.

In C. Masilamani Mudaliar's (supra) case the court

gave full effect to the intention of the testator as envisaged by the Will
and held “in the light of the facts and circumstances of the case and

CS (OS) No.1130/2006

Page No. 15 of 24

the legal setting, we are of the considered view that she having had
under the Shastric law, as envisaged in the Will, the properties in
recognition of her pre-existing right to maintenance, it is not a right
acquired for the first time under th instrument will, but it is a reflection
of the pre-exiting right under the Sastric law, which was blossomed
into an absolute ownership after 1956 under Section 14(1) of the
Act.”(emphasis supplied).
35.

The testator had in that case indicated that he was

bequeathing the properties, for life to his wife and cousin's widow in
lieu of their pre-existing right to maintenance. Thus, the court in those
facts and circumstances of the case interpreted the bequest to be one
under Section 14(1) of the Act.
36.

The decision in Mangat Mal (supra) can also be

distinguished on facts, as it pertains to a property given to the widow
of a deceased co-parcener for residence in lieu of her pre-existing
right to be maintained out of joint family property. The aforesaid two
decisions are also of no assistance to the plaintiff.
37.

On the other hand, the decision relied upon by the

defendants in Sadhu Singh v. Gurdwara Sahib Narike & Others,
JT 2006 (8) SC 525 fully supports the case of the defendants.

The

Hon'ble Supreme Court in this decision held as follows:“An owner of property has normally the right to
deal with that property including the right to
devise or bequeath the property. He could thus
dispose it of by a testament. Section 30 of the
CS (OS) No.1130/2006

Page No. 16 of 24

Act, not only does not curtail or affect this right,
it actually reaffirms that right. Thus, a Hindu
male could testamentarily dispose of his
property. When he does that, a succession
under the Act stands excluded and the property
passes to the testamentary heirs. Hence when
a male Hindu executes a Will bequeathing the
properties, the legatees take it subject to the
terms of the Will unless of course, any
stipulation therein is found invalid. Therefore,
there is nothing in the Act which affects the
right of a male Hindu to dispose of his property
by providing only life estate or limited estate
for his widow. The Act does not stand in the
way of his separate properties being dealt with
by him as he deems fit. His Will hence could not
be challenged as being hit by the Act.
When he thus validly disposes of his
property by providing for a limited estate to his
heir, the wife, or widow has to take it at the
estate falls. This restriction on her right so
provided, is really respected by the Act. It
provides in Section 14 (2) of the Act, that in
such a case, the widow is bound by their
limitation on her right and she cannot claim any
higher right by invoking Section 14 (1) of the
Act. In other words, conferment of limited
estate which is otherwise valid in law is
reinforced by this Act by the introduction of
Section 14(2) of the Act and excluding the
operation of Section 14(1) of the Act even if
that provision is held to be attracted in the case
of a succession under the Act. Invocation of
Section 14(1) of the Act in the case of a
testamentary disposition taking effect after the
Act, would make Sections 30 and 14(2)
redundant or otiose. It was also make
redundant, the expression 'property possessed
by a female Hindu' occurring in Section 14(1) of
the Act. An interpretation that leads to such a
result cannot certainly be accepted. Surely,
there is nothing in the Act compelling such an
interpretation. Sections 14 and 30 both have
play. Section 14 (1) applies in a case where the
female had received the property prior to the
CS (OS) No.1130/2006

Page No. 17 of 24

Act being entitled to it as a matter of right,
even if the right be to a limited estate under
the
Mitakshara
law
or
the
right
to
maintenance.”
38.

From these judgments, it is amply clear that when the

grant is not in satisfaction of a pre-existing right of maintenance or
otherwise, and a right is created for the first time by an instrument of
the nature expressed in Section 14(2) of the Act, the limitations
prescribed in the grant would bind the beneficiary and govern and
control the nature of interest created by the said instrument.
39.

Turning to the facts of the present case, firstly, it is not

even the plaintiff's case that her mother had a pre-existing right in, or
that she was possessed of the suit property in pursuance of any preexisting right in the suit property. It is not her case that the limited
protection granted by her father in favour of her mother in his Will
dated 8-2-1982 was in recognition of any such pre-existing right in the
suit property. The Will dated 08-02-82 only intends to make provision
for the spouse of the testator, at the fag end of her life after the death
of her husband.
40.

Thus, the Will in question only created an interest within

the realm of Section 14(2) of the Act which is limited in nature and the
property devolved upon the plaintiff and the defendant No.1, after the
demise of their father in accordance with the intention of their father
as expressed in the `Will'. The `Will' of the father bequeaths the suit

CS (OS) No.1130/2006

Page No. 18 of 24

property to the plaintiff and defendant no.1 in the following manner:-

41.

“That the effect of this Will be that after my death
my said two children, i.e. my son Shri Yatish Kumar
Satija and daughter Smt. Sushma Thadani would
become the co-owners of the house bearing No.B44, Defence Colony, New Delhi. The ownership
rights of the entire ground floor consisting of
garage, passage, front lawn, rear set back and one
servant quarter upon the garage will devolve, after
my death, to my son Shri Yatish Kumar Satija,
whereas the ownership rights of the entire first floor
and Barsati and two servant quarters shall devolve
upon my daughter Smt. Sushma Thadani. But my
said children shall have no right to dispose of the
property without the permission of my wife Smt.
Bimla Satija who will take possession of the entire
house after my death and will be entitled to recover
the entire rental income of the house after my death
and will be entitled to recover the entire rental
income of the house.”
In my view, the case now sought to be pleaded by the

plaintiff that her mother became the absolute owner of the suit
property upon the demise of her father, by operation of Section 14(1)
of the Act is not tenable in law, in the light of the facts already
pleaded, and those sought to be pleaded by way of amendment. The
amendment sought by the plaintiff to the aforesaid effect also
tantamounts to withdrawing the case initially set up and setting up a
case inconsistent with pleadings contained in para 13 of the plaint as
originally filed. The plaintiff is now seeking to set up a new case not
originally pleaded in the plaint. The averments made in the existing
para 35 of the plaint are to my mind of no avail, since they are not
only contrary to those contained in the existing para 13 but also
contrary to the plaint and clear language of the `Will' dated 8.2.1982
CS (OS) No.1130/2006

Page No. 19 of 24

admittedly executed by the father of the plaintiff. Such amendments
cannot be allowed [See AIR 1965 SC 1008].
42.

Thus, the proposed amendments in paras 13, 14A and 35

would not assist in resolving the real controversy between the parties,
and on the contrary would hamper administration of justice by causing
unnecessary delay.

Same are without any substance. It is equally

settled that a party will not be permitted to set up an entirely new
case to defeat the defence raised by the other party. Consequently
they are rejected.
43.

The plaintiff has proposed to insert an additional relief of

declaration, that the sale deed dated 17-05-06 be declared as null,
void and illegal. The relevant averments are in proposed paras 42. The
sale deed dated 17.5.06 cannot be said to be a void contract. At best
it is a voidable contract.

(Kindly see Valliyal Sreedevi Amma v.

Subhadra Devi & Ors., AIR 1976 Ker 19).
44.

The aforesaid relief now sought to be included is founded

upon yet another declaration (though not explicitly sought by the
plaintiff) to the effect that the plaintiff has a pre-emptory right to
purchase the share of defendant no.1 in the suit property. However,
no consequential relief i.e to enforce the so-called right of pre-emption
has been sought by the plaintiff by way of amendment, assuming that
such a relief could, in law, be claimed by her in the facts of this case.
The relief of declaration in respect of the sale deed dated 17.5.06

CS (OS) No.1130/2006

Page No. 20 of 24

cannot be granted by the court in view of the proviso to Section 34 of
the Specific Relief Act, 1963.
45.

In P. Srinivasamurthy V. Leelavathy, AIR 2000 Madras

516, the Madras High Court held that the remedy of the non alienating
co-heirs, will be to seek the intervention of the Court to enable them
to acquire the right which has been transferred away by the other coheirs in violation of Section 22(1) of the Act. The question of invalidity
of the transfer effected by the other co-heir in favour of

strangers

becomes relevant in such an action as an incidental matter which has
necessarily to be gone into for the purpose of determining whether the
plaintiff is entitled to the relief sought by him against his co-heirs in
enforcement of the right conferred by Section 22(1) of the Act.
46.

However, in this case the amendment sought is only in

respect of the said “incidental matter”, whereas the relief of
enforcement of the claimed right of pre-emption, that ought to have
been prayed has not even been prayed for in the suit as originally
framed or as sought to be amended.

I, therefore, reject the

amendment sought by the plaintiff as proposed in paras 42 and in the
prayer clause as well. The proposed valuation of the said relief in para
46 is also consequently rejected. I also find that, in view of my finding
that the suit property was bequeathed to the plaintiff and defendant
no.1 by their father by virtue of the `Will' dated 8.2.1982, the claim
half heartedly set up by the plaintiff on the basis of Section 22 of the

CS (OS) No.1130/2006

Page No. 21 of 24

Act does not, in fact, lie. Section 22 applies only in a case where the
inheritance between the co-sharers is through intestacy. However, in
this case the suit property had devolved upon the plaintiff and
defendant no.1 through the aforesaid Will. The plea based on Section
22 of the Act is therefore, in any case not tenable in law and cannot
be permitted to be pleaded.
47.

Since proposed paras 36 to 41 pertains to events that have

occurred after the filing of the present suit and are related to prayer
clause (b) and (c) of the original plaint and are anyway material to the
present controversy, the same are allowed in order to shorten the
litigation between the parties and resolve the real matter/controversy
between the parties. Proposed para 44 is also allowed to be inserted
for same reason. Prayer clause 'B' so far as it relates to and is
incidental

to

the

amendments

permitted

to

be

carried

out

hereinbefore is also allowed. The said prayer clause be inserted to the
following extent:
B......restraining the defendants, their agents, legal
heirs, servants, assigns, nominees, representatives, etc.
from carrying out any changes/alterations/additions in
the suit property.
48.

Corresponding valuation clause in proposed para 46 is also

allowed. The application is thus, partially allowed. Amended plaint be
filed within three weeks.
IA No. 8432:
Since the proposed defendant No.3 M/s. Citi-Mates Builders
CS (OS) No.1130/2006

Page No. 22 of 24

& Promoters Pvt. Ltd. are the owners of ground floor property and the
relief

now is

claimed

substantially

against

the

said

proposed

defendant, its presence before the court is necessary and proper. This
application is, therefore, allowed. Let amended memo of parties be
filed within a week.
IA Nos. 6197/2006, 11178/2006 and 8433/072:
In view of the discussion and findings arrived at while disposing
of IA 8431, I am of the view that suit property having devolved upon
the plaintiff and defendant No.1 by way of testamentary succession
through Will dated 8.2.1982, the plaintiff has failed to make a case for
grant of an interlocutory injunction directing defendants to maintain
status quo with regard to title and possession. However, the plaintiff
has prima facie satisfied me that suit property must be preserved from
any structural damage, alteration, modification. The defendant is also
liable to be, and is hereby restrained from disconnecting or tampering
with the water, electricity or other essential services/amenities being
enjoyed by plaintiff in her portion of the property. I accordingly
restrain the defendants or any person claiming through them from
carrying out any structural modification/alteration/damage to the suit
property (including the area in their possession) and also injunct them
from interfering with the plaintiff's enjoyment of the portion of
property in her possession. The defendants are also directed to
remove all malba/building material etc. from the common areas of the

CS (OS) No.1130/2006

Page No. 23 of 24

suit property till the disposal of the suit. The defendant shall provide
access to the plaintiff to the backyard on the ground floor only for the
purpose of attending to repairs and maintenance of the water pump
motor, water meter and water tank of the plaintiff.

All other reliefs as

are not specifically granted are rejected. Applications are disposed of
accordingly.
49.

In this view of the matter the ex-parte injunction order

passed against the defendant No.1 is vacated as being infructuous on
the date the same was passed, and also on account of the failure of
the plaintiff to make our a prima facie case in her favour.

VIPIN SANGHI
JUDGE
April 24th 2007
aruna/as

CS (OS) No.1130/2006

Page No. 24 of 24

