*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

RCR NO.31/2007

%

26.02.2008
Smt. Narmada Joshi

.....Petitioner
Through: Mr. Rajiv Bajaj, Advocate
versus

Sh. Laxmi Narayan Gupta

.....Respondent
Through: Mr. Rajiv Sharma, Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

VIPIN SANGHI, J. (ORAL)
1.

This petition has been preferred to challenge the order

dated 19.4.2007 passed by the Rent Controller, Delhi in E-335/06/04
whereby the

Rent Controller has allowed the petition filed by the

respondent-landlord under Section 14(1)(e) of the Delhi Rent Control
Act (the Act)

and an eviction order has been passed against the

petitioner-tenant.
2.

The premises bearing No.24/155, Shakti Nagar, New Delhi

is admittedly owned by the respondent/landlord.

RCR No.31/2007

A portion of this

Page No.1 of 9

premises consisting of one room and a kolki being used as kitchen with
the facility of common latrine and bath room was let out to the
petitioner by the respondent on a monthly rent of Rs.500/-, excluding
water and electricity charges.

The purpose of letting has been

admitted by the petitioner-tenant to be only for residential purpose.
Leave to defend was granted to the petitioner.

The parties went to

trial and by a detailed order the eviction petition has been allowed, as
aforesaid.

The submission made by the petitioner is that in the

eviction petition the respondent-landlord had suppressed the fact that
his son owned a residential flat

comprising four rooms

apart from

kitchen, bath room, latrine etc. bearing No.B-1/42, Naveentam
Apartment, Plot No.7, Section-IX, Rohini, Delhi.
account of this

concealment of material fact

It is argued that on
alone the eviction

petition ought to have been dismissed. It is further argued that due to
the said concealment the petitioner has not had the opportunity to
establish that the said accommodation is reasonably suitable for use
and occupation of the landlord.
3.
Court in

The petitioner has further relied on three decisions of this
Abdul Hamid and Anr. vs. Nur Mohammad, AIR 1976

Delhi 328 , Hari Mohan Nehru vs. Rameshwar Dayal (17) 1980
DLT 284, Mohd. Usman vs. Shahzad Begum & Ors. 36 (1988) DLT
92 to contend that since the landlord had not disclosed, and had
concealed the other residential accommodation available to him from

RCR No.31/2007

Page No.2 of 9

the court, by not making a reference to the same in the pleadings, the
claim of the landlord for bona fide requirement of residence cannot
be accepted.
4.

On the other hand, the submission of the respondent

landlord is that the factum of the ownership of the aforesaid flat by the
son of the respondent/landlord was firstly not a material fact, inasmuch
as, that flat is not owned by the landlord and in any case, admittedly,
the said flat is not a reasonably suitable accommodation available to
the landlord. The respondent has relied on the two decisions of the
Supreme Court in support of his submissions, that is, M.L. Prabhakar
vs. Rajiv Singal,

2001(2) SCC 355 and Shiv Sarup Gupta vs.

Dr. Mahesh Chand Gupta,1999(6) SCC 222.
5.

The aspect regarding the availability of other reasonably

suitable accommodation with the landlord has been dealt with by the
Rent Controller in the following manner:
“(iii) That the petitioner/landlord does not
own any other reasonably suitable
residential accommodation;
Regarding the alternative accommodation, it is
the case of the respondent that the petitioner
has concealed true facts from this court that
one of his sons, namely, Sh. Shree Niwas Gupta
owns a residential flat No.B-1/42, Naveentam
Apartment, Plot No.7, Section IX, Rohini, Delhi,
which consists of four rooms besides kitchen,
bathroom, latrine etc., and which has been
rented out by him on a very exorbitant rate of
rent and the present petition has been filed in
RCR No.31/2007

Page No.3 of 9

order
to
create
a
false
paucity
of
accommodation. Counsel for the respondent
has also relied upon a judgment (supra) AIR
1988 NOC 71 (DELHI) , and he has argued
that as the petitioner has concealed material
facts from this court, present eviction petition
is liable to be dismissed.
On the other hand counsel for the
petitioner has relied upon a judgment (supra)
1997 RLR 439, wherein it has been held as
under:“If landlord living in a building sued
tenant of same building's portion, then
tenant cannot contend that landlord has
some other house also as he is not
expected to split his family.”
15.I have gone through the rival contentions
of both the parties regarding the
aforesaid ingredient. PW1 in his cross
examination has admitted .It is correct
that my son Sri Niwas Gupta owns
his own flat for the purposes of
residence of himself and for his
family members. Vol. that is not
sufficient for whole of the family.”
In view of the aforesaid admission made
by the PW1 in his cross examination, it is
clear that the petitioner also admits that
his son Sh. Sri Niwas Gupta owns a 10
residential flat in Rohini, as no replication
to the written statement has been filed
on the record, as discussed above. Now,
the only question, which has to be seen
is whether the said flat at Rohini can be
considered reasonably suitable for the
residence of petitioner and his family
members. In this regard, the judgment
relied upon the petitioner (supra) is
squarely applicable to the facts of the
present case, as in the present case, the
landlord has sued tenant of the same
building and the petitioner has desired
that he wants to live in the property
alongwith his son and family, and he
RCR No.31/2007

Page No.4 of 9

cannot live alone, and he has stated said
facts in para 7 of his affidavit, and
nothing material has come out in his
cross examination.
Accordingly, the
petitioner is not expected to split his
family for the sake of the convenience of
the tenant at two separate places, one at
Rohini and one at suit premises, and the
counsel for the petitioner has also argued
that alternative accommodation is far
away in Rohini, whereas, the grand son
of petitioner is doing the business on the
ground floor of the premises in question
and he wants to live with his son and
grand son in the twilight of his age.
Accordingly, the suitability of the
accommodation has to be seen from the
point of view of distance between the
suit premises and the location of the
premises at Rohini, which must be
around 11-12 K.Ms. away from the suit
premises, which are situated at Shakti
Nagar, whereas the suit premises would
be definitely more convenient to the
petitioner and his family members, as
one of the grand son of the petitioner is
admittedly, running a shop on the ground
floor of the suit premises, which has not
been denied by the respondent herself in
her written statement. Accordingly, the
premises in question would be more
suitable for the residence of the
petitioner and his family members at one
place, and the premises located at Rohini
would not be suitable for residence of
entire family together and in any case,
the petitioner is not expected to bifurcate
his family for the sake of the
convenience of the tenant and the
judgment relied upon the respondent's
counsel is not applicable to the peculiar
facts of the present case, as in the said
case (supra), AIR 1988 NOC 71
(DELHI), the owner concealed material
facts from the court that he was having
another premises of which he or his sons
were the owners and the said premises
RCR No.31/2007

Page No.5 of 9

were near to the premises in question
and were admittedly few feets from the
suit property. Whereas the distance and
the premises in question and premises at
Rohini would be approximately 11-12 K.
Ms. Accordingly, said judgment is not
applicable to the peculiar facts of the
present case and further petitioner has
specified his requirement to be five bed
rooms, one independent drawing room,
dining room, guest room and one room
for
accommodation
of
servant.
Admittedly, as per the suggestion given
by the respondent in the cross
examination of PW1, he has admitted
that there are four rooms in the said flat .
RW1 has also stated in his cross
examination that “It is correct that
whole of the family of the petitioner
cannot live in the said flat.”
Therefore, looking from every angle the
said accommodation at Rohini would not
be reasonably suitable for residence of
the petitioner and his family members.
Accordingly, I hold that petitioner has no
other reasonably suitable alternative
residential accommodation.”
6.

From the discussion which is found in the impugned order

it is clear that the petitioner tenant had ample opportunity to deal
with the aspect about the availability of alternative reasonably suitable
accommodation with the landlord.
petitioner

became

aware

about

It is not his case that the
the

existence

accommodation at a late stage in the proceedings.

of

the

said

The tenant was

aware of, and had specifically pleaded about the availability of the said
accommodation in his written statement.

No prejudice has been

caused to the petitioner on account of the fact that in the eviction
RCR No.31/2007

Page No.6 of 9

petition

the

landlord

had

not

made

a

mention

of

the

said

accommodation.
7.

I also find force in the submission of the learned counsel for

the respondent that the said accommodation, in any event, could not
be considered to be a reasonably suitable alternative accommodation
available to the landlord. Admittedly, the said accommodation is not
owned by the respondent and is at a distance of

at least ten

kilometers from the present accommodation. The landlord is already
in occupation

of a substantial portion of the property bearing

No.24/155, Shakti Nagar, Delhi and the landlord could not be expected
to move into a flat which not even owned by him, merely to
accommodate the petitioner tenant. His desire to live with his children
and grand children cannot be grudged by the tenant and he cannot be
told by the tenant to split his family. [(See Smt. Maya Devi vs. Amar
Singh 75 (1998) DLT 165 and Shiv Sarup Gupta (supra)].
8.

In my view, the decisions cited by the respondent squarely

apply in the facts of this case. In M.L. Prabhakar (supra) a similar
argument was raised by the tenant that the landlord had suppressed
the premises which were available to him at a different location. The
argument was countered by the landlord by submitting that the only
requirement in law is to disclose such accommodation as is suitable for
residence of the landlord. Relying on Ram Narain Arora vs. Asha
Rani, 1991(1) SCC 141 it was submitted that the question whether the
RCR No.31/2007

Page No.7 of 9

landlord had any other reasonably suitable residential accommodation
is a question which is intermixed
fide requirement.

with the question regarding bona

Whether the landlord had any other reasonably

suitable residential accommodation is a defence for the tenant to take.
It was held in Ram Narain Arora (supra) that whether the other
accommodation is more suitable than the suit premises would not
depend solely on pleadings and non-disclosure by the landlord that he
has another accommodation would not be fatal to the eviction
proceedings, if both the parties understood the case and placed
materials before the Court and the case of neither party was
prejudiced.

The Supreme Court applied the ratio of Ram Narain

Arora (supra) and held “In this case even though the landlord has not
mentioned about the other two premises, the material in respect of the
other two premises was placed before the Rent Controller as well as
before the High Court, thus no prejudice has been caused. The parties
have squarely dealt with this question.” In M.L. Prabhakar (supra)
the Supreme Court also held that “it could not have been the
intendment of the rent control law to compel the landlord to shift to a
different house and locality so as to permit the tenant to continue to
live in the tenanted premises.”
9.

Since the other accommodation is not even owned by the

respondent and admittedly is not enough to meet the needs of the
respondent/landlord, there is no concealment by the respondent in not

RCR No.31/2007

Page No.8 of 9

making any averment with regard to the said accommodation in the
eviction petition. Dismissed.
10.

Trial court records be returned forthwith.

February 26, 2008
aj

RCR No.31/2007

VIPIN SANGHI, J.

Page No.9 of 9

