*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

R.C.R NO.37 OF 2007
& C.M. Appl. No. 10428/2007

%

Dated : February 27th 2008
Shri T.B. Jain

.....Petitioner
Through: Mr. R.K. Saini, Advocate
versus

Smt. Savita Ravi & Anr.

..... Respondent
Through: Mr. Rahul Gupta,
Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

VIPIN SANGHI, J.(ORAL)
1.

This revision petition has been preferred to challenge the

order dated 28.04.2007 passed by the learned Additional Rent
Controller (ARC), Delhi in E-563/07/05 filed by the respondent landlady
under Section 14(1)(e) read with Section 25B of the Delhi Rent Control
Act (the Act) whereby the learned ARC has dismissed the application of
the petitioner seeking leave to defend holding that no triable issue has
been raised, and has passed an eviction order against the petitioner.
RC Rev.37/2007

page 1 of 14

The petitioner is a tenant in the tenanted premises comprising of a two
rooms set on the first floor of property bearing No.40/1, Shakti Nagar,
Delhi. No issue with regard to the ownership of the respondent, the
relationship of landlord and tenant and the purpose of letting being
residential was seriously raised either before the Rent Controller or
before me by the petitioner.
2.

It is not disputed that on the first floor of the said

property, there are two independent two bedroom units, one of which
is let out to the petitioner and the other is lying vacant and is available
with the respondent.

The husband of the respondent is the Senior

General Manager (Finance) with the Power Finance Corporation and
presently the respondent is residing with her family in a tenanted two
bedroom accommodation in Masjid Moth taken by her husband on
lease. The family of the respondent consists of herself, her husband,
one son-who was around 14 years of age at the time of filing of the
eviction petition in 2005, and one college going daughter. The fatherin-law of the respondent sometimes resides in Chennai and sometimes
in Delhi.

The respondent also has two married sisters-in-laws

(husband's sisters) and two brothers-in-laws (husband's brothers). The
minimum requirement of the landlady was stated to be of four rooms
apart from other living areas, such as drawing-cum-dining room,
kitchen & toilet.

RC Rev.37/2007

page 2 of 14

3.

Mr. R.K. Saini, learned counsel for the petitioner firstly

submits that while deciding the application seeking leave to defend,
the learned ARC has gone into the merits of the defence. He submits
that the ARC was only required to examine whether the defence
disclosed by petitioner raised any triable issues, and if it did, the
petitioner ought to have been granted the leave. He submits that the
learned ARC has conducted a pre-trial, and without granting an
opportunity to the petitioner to file his written statement or to lead
evidence in support of his defence, the defences raised by the
petitioner have been rejected.
4.

The further submission of

petitioner was not served

Mr. R.K. Saini is that the

with the documents filed along with the

eviction petition. Merely the eviction petition along with the site plan
as filed by the respondent was served along with the summons and in
the absence of the documents the petitioner was deprived of a fair
opportunity to file a proper application and affidavit seeking leave to
defend. He submits that in the application seeking leave to defend,
this point had specifically been raised by the petitioner. He submits
that this itself entitled the petitioner to the grant of leave to defend the
eviction petition.
5.

The next submission is that even though the property in

question had devolved equally and jointly in favour of the respondent

RC Rev.37/2007

page 3 of 14

landlady and her mother by virtue of a 'Will' of the maternal grand
mother dated 14.11.1983, and a registered partition dated 29.01.2001
had been between the respondent and her mother, according to which
the first floor and a portion on the barasati floor of the said property
had fallen to the share of the respondent, for all these years the
respondent had not felt the need to occupy any portion of the said
property. The notice dated 19.4.2005 issued by the respondent to the
petitioner prior to filing of the eviction petition did not even make a
whisper about the bona fide need of the respondent.

These facts,

according to the petitioner raise a triable issue about the bona fide
need of the respondent.
6.

The further submission of the petitioner is that the

respondent landlady had deliberately concealed and mis-stated the
extent of accommodation that was already available to her in the
property in question.

She had failed to disclose the

one room

accommodation available on the second/barsati floor. If the same is
taken into account, the respondent would have three bedroom
accommodation available with her, which is sufficient to meet her
needs considering the size of her family.

Counsel for the petitioner

submitted that the aforesaid disclosure made by the petitioner in the
application seeking leave to defend also raised a triable issue. At the
stage of consideration of the said application the Controller had merely
to see whether a triable issue had been raised or not, and not to
RC Rev.37/2007

page 4 of 14

conduct a pre-trial and reach a conclusion whether the tenant would
ultimately fail or succeed in case he is granted leave to defend the
eviction petition. He has relied on

M/s Nahar Enterprises vs. M/s

Hyderabad Allwyn Ltd. & Anr. 2007(1) RCR 345 wherein the
Supreme Court has held that when summons is sent calling upon a
defendant to appear in court and file his written statement, it is
obligatory on the part of the court to send a copy of the plaint and
other documents appended thereto in terms of Order 5 Rule 2 CPC.
He also relied on Ltd. Col. S.S. Puri vs. S.P. Malhotra

95(2002)

DLT 399 in support of his submission that at the stage of considering
the aspect of grant of leave, the real test should be whether the facts
disclosed in the affidavit seeking leave to defend, prima facie, show
that the landlord would be disentitled from obtaining an order of
eviction, and not whether in the end, the defence may fail. It is well to
remember that when the leave to defend is refused, serious
consequences of eviction follow and the party seeking leave is denied
an opportunity to test the truth of the averments made in the eviction
petition by cross-examination.
7.

On the other hand, Mr. Rahul Gupta who appears for the

respondent has defended the impugned order.

He submits that the

learned ARC has applied the well established parameters while
considering the petitioners application seeking leave to defend. While
denying that the petitioner had not been supplied with a complete set
RC Rev.37/2007

page 5 of 14

of documents as filed along with the eviction petition, he submits that,
assuming that documents had not been supplied along with the
summons in the eviction petition, mere non supply of documents does
not lead to the conclusion that the tenant would be entitled to grant of
leave to defend the eviction petition. He submits that from August,
2005 when the application seeking leave to defend had been filed by
the petitioner till April, 2007, when the same was considered by the
Rent Controller, no application to seek supply of documents was filed
before the Rent Controller or any such request made to the
respondent. He submits that, in fact, the petitioner had attorned to
the respondent on being satisfied about the existence of the registered
'Will' of the respondent's maternal grand mother and the subsequent
partition deed whereby the tenanted premises fell to the share of the
respondent. He further submits that it was open to the petitioner to
have inspected the records, and it is difficult to believe that the
petitioner did not inspect the record for over two years when the
application seeking leave to defend remained pending.

He also

submits that a perusal of the application seeking leave to defend and
the affidavit filed by the petitioner shows that the petitioner had all the
documents before him at the time of preparation of the same.
8.

On merits, learned counsel for the respondent submits

that the respondent is living in rented accommodation and she cannot
be dictated terms by the petitioner tenant to require her to remain in
RC Rev.37/2007

page 6 of 14

rented accommodation when she has expressed her desire to occupy
premises owned by her. With regard to non disclosure of the barasati
room as accommodation available to her for her residence by the
respondent landlady, the submission of Mr. Gupta is that the said room
is in fact a servants room and that the landlady was expected to
disclose only that accommodation which she reasonably considered as
proper for her occupation and that for her family.

He submits that a

bare perusal of the plan of the barsati floor relied upon by the
petitioner would show that the latrine and bathroom are small, and are
situated in one corner, while the room is disjuncted from them.

In

between the room on the one side and the latrine & bathroom on the
other side of the terrace floor, there is open sky. He further submits
that the existence of the room on the barasati floor is evident from the
partition deed between the respondent and her mother which was
placed on record, and the law does not require the landlord to file a
plan of the accommodation available with her. He has also referred to
the various authorities considered by the learned ARC while disposing
of the application seeking leave to defend the eviction petition.
9.

Having considered the rival submissions of the parties, I

am inclined to reject that petition, since I am satisfied that the learned
ARC has properly exercised his jurisdiction and applied the correct
principles in coming to the conclusion that the petitioner had not
raised any triable issue in his application and affidavit seeking leave to
RC Rev.37/2007

page 7 of 14

defend.
10.

While it is true that at the time of consideration of the

tenants application seeking leave to defend an eviction petition under
Section 14(1)(e) of the Act, all that is required to be considered by the
Rent Controller is whether any triable issues have been raised by the
defendant tenant or not, it is equally well settled that leave to defend
should not be granted where the defense does not raise any triable
issues and the defense is found to be vague or frivolous, and is raised
merely to delay the disposal of the eviction petition. Leave to defend
cannot be granted to a tenant merely for the asking. When the
Controller examines the defenses raised by the tenant in his
application seeking leave to defend, it cannot be said that he conducts
a pre-trial. Obviously, the Controller is required to evaluate the
defenses disclosed by the tenant at the time of consideration of the
tenants application. Without such examination he possibly cannot
arrive at a conclusion whether the defense disclosed raise a triable
issue, or whether the defense is frivolous. The test to determine
whether the tenant has raised a triable issue is to examine whether the
landlord would fail in his attempt to evict the tenant, if the defense of
the tenant, as disclosed, is established. This test has been applied in
the present case as well.
11.

RC Rev.37/2007

I find no force in the submission of the petitioner that on

page 8 of 14

account of the petitioner allegedly not being served with the
documents filed along with the eviction petition, a triable issue arises,
entitling the petitioner to the grant of leave to defend the eviction
petition. Though the eviction petition was filed in the year 2005, and
the application seeking leave to defend was preferred in August 2005,
the petitioner admittedly did not take any steps to obtain copies of the
documents either from the respondent or from the court till the time
that the application of the petitioner came to be decided in April 2007.
This in itself shows that the submission of the petitioner that he did not
have copies of the documents cannot be accepted. In any event, and
assuming that the petitioner in fact was not served with copies of the
documents, nothing prevented him from either approaching the
respondent or the court to obtain copies and, if he felt that any further
triable issues could be raised after a perusal of the said documents, he
could have filed an application to raise further grounds or to amend
the existing application and file an additional affidavit. None of this
was done. Even before me it is not pointed out what further triable
issues the petitioner was prevented from raising on account of the
alleged non supply of the documents. He is admittedly possessed of
the documents now. I see force in the submission of the respondent
that after demanding the documents of title from the respondent vide
his reply dated 15th June, 2005, the petitioner had in fact attorned to
the respondent upon being satisfied about the ownership of the

RC Rev.37/2007

page 9 of 14

property in question in the hands of the respondent. It is also
interesting and pertinent to note that the petitioner did not attribute
the ownership of the other half of the barsati floor to the respondent.
The reason for this appears to be fact that as per the partition deed
executed between the respondent and her mother, that area did not
fall to the share of the respondent. This also is a pointer to the fact
that the petitioner was in fact having complete knowledge about the
documents filed by the respondent along with the eviction petition. I
find no infirmity, much less perversity with the reasoning of the
learned ARC on this aspect. Even if it were to be believed that the
petitioner was not served with the documents filed with the eviction
petition, what has to be seen is, whether any real prejudice was
suffered by the petitioner tenant. The petitioner has not been able to
establish that he has suffered any prejudice or disadvantage on
account of the alleged non supply of the documents. The decision cited
by the petitioner in the case of M/s Nahar Enterprises (supra) is of
no avail in the facts of this case. No doubt, it is obligatory that along
with the plaint, copies of documents filed by the plaintiff are required
to be served on the defendant. However in the present case, the facts
as noted herein above are entirely different from the facts in the
aforesaid case. In that case the court had passed an ex parte decree
against the defendant, and had also dismissed the application of the
defendant to set aside the ex parte decree. In that background of

RC Rev.37/2007

page 10 of 14

facts, the court held that the ex parte decree could not be passed
against the defendant who had not been duly served with the plaint
and the documents. I also find no force in the submission of the
petitioner that merely because the respondent had not earlier filed an
eviction petition against the petitioner, even though the tenanted
premises fell to her share in January 2001, is a factor which raises
triable issues or casts doubts on the bona fide need of the respondent
and her family members. The landlord may file an eviction petition on
the grounds of bona fide need as and when the said need arises
subject, of course, to the limitation that such a petition cannot be filed
within the first five years of the purchase of the tenanted premises by
the landlord. The delayed filing of the eviction petition possibly shows
that the landlord did not rush to file a petition at the earliest possible
opportunity,

and

filed

the

same

only

when

her

need

for

accommodation for her residence and the residence of her family
members genuinely and bona fide arose. This aspect does not raise a
triable issue as claimed.
12.

There is no requirement in law that prior to filing of an

eviction petiton under Section 14(1)(e) of the Delhi Rent Control Act,
the landlord should serve a notice on the tenant disclosing his bona
fide requirement. Consequently, merely because the respondent

in

her notice dated 19th April, 2005 did not spell out her bona fide need, it
does not follow that the need is not bona fide or genuine, or that a
RC Rev.37/2007

page 11 of 14

triable issue arises.
13.

Coming to the next submission of the petitioner, which

is the mainstay of his arguments, that the respondent had concealed
the accommodation available on the barsati floor consisting of one
room, latrine and toilet, and that by itself is a reason good enough for
grant of leave to defend the eviction petition, I once again do not find
any force in this submission of the petitioner. The respondent has
explained that the barsati floor room is not fit for use and occupation
by the respondent and her family members and is in fact usable as a
servant’s quarter. It is for this reason that the respondent, while
describing the extent of accommodation available to her in the
property in question, did not mention the barsati room, the latrine and
toilet. It has been held by the Supreme Court that merely because the
landlord fails to disclose any part of the accommodation available with
him, it does not disentitle him from obtaining an eviction order.
Reference in this regard may be made to H.L.Prabhakar V. Rajiv
Singal (2001) 2 SCC 355 and Ram Narain Arora V. Asha Rani,
(1991) 1 SCC 141. I have recently dealt with this issue in Smt.
Narmada Joshi Vs. Sh. Laxmi Narayan Gupta RCR No.31/2007, decided
on 26.2.2008.

The learned ARC has rightly placed reliance on Om

Prakash versus Dev Raj Kohli 679 (1997) DLT 721 wherein it has
been held that if the landlord while submitting the site plan of the
premises omitted to furnish the plan of the second floor in his
RC Rev.37/2007

page 12 of 14

possession, as the same was not used for his residence, the landlord
commits no illegality and is not disentitled from seeking an order of
eviction if the need is bona fide. Therefore I am of the view that no
triable issue arises on the basis of the aforesaid argument of the
petitioner.
14.

I also find force in the submission of the respondent

that the room on the barsati floor cannot be put to use by the family of
the respondent or by herself. The latrine and bathroom, apart from
being small, are separated from the room by some distance and there
is no roof in the passage from the room to the latrine and bathroom.
This means that the occupant of the barsati room is exposed to the
vagaries of the weather while accessing the latrine and bathroom from
the room on the barsati floor. Even according to the petitioner, the
respondent's husband is a senior officer with the Power Finance
Corporation. Looking to the background and status from which the
respondent and her family hails, it is unreasonable to expect that the
respondent or her family members should be expected to occupy the
barsati room in these circumstances.

Moreover, even if the barsati

room is taken into consideration as a room available to the respondent
and her family members, even then, as opposed to the requirement of
four bed rooms, the availability with the respondent would be, at best,
of three rooms. The respondent requires one room for herself and her
husband and one room each for grown-up children apart from a guest
RC Rev.37/2007

page 13 of 14

room to accommodate the father, married sisters and brothers and the
family of the respondent’s husband. Merely because the respondent’s
daughter is stated to be occupying hostel accommodation it does not
mean that she does not need a room of her own at her home. She
would need to visit and live with the family during her holidays or
otherwise. No triable issue arises even on this aspect.
For the aforesaid reasons I find no merit in this petition and
dismiss the same.

February 27, 2008
aj

RC Rev.37/2007

VIPIN SANGHI
JUDGE

page 14 of 14

