*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

IA No. 8256/06 IN CS(OS) 535/06

+

Judgment reserved on: January 16, 2007
%

Judgment delivered on: February 27, 2007

Mr. Vijay Kumar Awasty
Through:

....... Plaintiff
Mr. Abhinav Vashisht with
Ms.Prachi Vashisht, Advocates

versus
Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited
....... Defendant
Through: Mr.Sharat Kapoor & Kumar Saurabh,
Advocates
CORAM
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

No

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

No

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

No

VIPIN SANGHI, J.

1.

The plaintiff, who is the landlord of the Flat No. B-102, 1st Floor,

Statesman House, Barakhamba Road, New Delhi-110001, admeasuring
a total super area of 3000 square feet and 8(eight)

CS (OS) 535.06

designated

Page 1 of180

Commercial Parking Spaces, bearing no. BB3 PO1 to BB3 PO8
(hereinafter referred to as the “tenanted premises”), has filed the
above suit for ejectment, mesne profit, pendente lite and future
interest and for recovery of amount due on account of illegal
occupation of the tenanted premises by the defendant.
2.

The

defendant

entered

appearance

and

filed

its

written

statement. The matter was listed for admission/denial of documents
filed by the parties and the plaintiff denied all documents filed by the
defendant, whereas, documents marked as Ex. P-1 to Ex.P-9 filed by
the plaintiff were admitted by the defendant and the rest of the
documents filed were denied. Thereafter, this application under Order
12 Rule 6 was moved by the plaintiff for passing of a decree/judgment
based on the admissions made by the defendants in its pleadings and
during the course of recording of admission and denial of documents.
Defendant filed its reply, arguments were advanced by both sides and
orders reserved.
3.

The plaintiff's case is that the tenanted premises were leased out

to the defendant purportedly for a period of 3 years commencing from
December 13, 2001 at a monthly rent of Rs.2,85,000/- per month (Two
Lac Eighty Five Thousand only) calculated at Rs.95 per sq.ft. of super
area, and four out of the eight parking spaces were let out at an
aggregate of Rs.12,000/- (Twelve thousand only) per month at the rate
CS (OS) 535.06

Page 2 of180

of Rs.3000/- per perking space. Maintenance charges were to be paid
separately.

The said terms were reduced into a document dated

December 13, 2001 and executed by and between the parties. It is
further averred that as per the said unregistered lease deed the
defendant had an option to renew the tenancy for a further period of 3
years with an escalation of 20% on the last rent paid, provided notice
to that effect was given 3 months prior to the expiry of the lease. It is
further averred by the plaintiff that since the unregistered lease deed
was hit by Section 49 of the Registration Act it did not create a tenancy
for a period of 3 years and the tenancy created was only a tenancy
from month to month. Even otherwise, without prejudice, no notice by
registered A.D. Post exercising the option of renewal at the enhanced
rate was ever received by the plaintiff within the stipulated period.
Instead, the defendant wrote several letters to the plaintiff offering
rent at a lower rate than what was already being paid. The said letters
were admitted by the defendant and exhibited as Ex-P1 & Ex-P2.
4.

It is, further, averred that this offer was rejected by the plaintiff

vide his letter dated November 26, 2004 and he once again pressed for
renewal of the lease on the originally agreed stipulations. This offer
was also rejected by the defendant vide its letter dated December 17,
2004 (exhibited as Ex-P-3). It is further averred in the plaint that from
December 13, 2004 onwards the defendant unilaterally started

CS (OS) 535.06

Page 3 of180

sending and continued to so send, cheques, purportedly towards rent
at a decreased rate of Rs.72.85 per sq. ft. which translates to
Rs.2,18,550/- per month which were encashed by the plaintiff under
protest.
5.

The plaintiff then, it is averred, got issued through his counsel, a

Notice of Termination of Tenancy/ Notice to Quit dated January 16,
2006, addressed to the defendant, terminating the tenancy with effect
from the close of the month of the tenancy expiring on February 13,
2006. The receipt of this notice is admitted by the defendant.
6.

Thereafter, it is averred, the plaintiff did not accept any rent for

the period After February 13, 2006 for the tenanted premises.
7.

In written statement the defendant claims that vide the

unregistered lease deed the defendant was granted the legal right to
retain the tenanted premises for a period of 9 (nine) years.

At the

same time it is also alleged that the lease deed is neither registered
not adequately stamped and therefore cannot be used for any purpose
and would not operate to give effect to the purported transaction. It is
further alleged that the suit is based on an unregistered lease
agreement and therefore is not maintainable. It is also the case of the
defendant that M/s. Ansal Properties and Industries Ltd were part of the
lease agreement and the entire deal was made by M/s. Ansal
Properties on behalf of all the flat owners and thus M/s. Ansal

CS (OS) 535.06

Page 4 of180

Properties were necessary parties to the instant proceedings.

The

plaintiff having failed to array them as parties, the suit was liable to be
rejected for non-joinder of necessary parties.
8.

The defendant has further pleaded that being an instrumentality

of state it was entitled to fix the rent (even reduce the same if the
market rate so fluctuated) unilaterally and by fixing the rent at a lower
rate it was acting within its competence and in accordance with the
agreement between the parties.
9.

In the written statement the defendant has admitted that

originally the rent was fixed at Rs.95 per square-foot of the super area
per month, and maintenance charges were fixed at Rs.14 per squarefoot of the super area a month. It is also admitted that after the expiry
of the earlier period of lease, the plaintiff was offered a fresh lease by
the defendant which offer was not accepted as the plaintiff was
insisting on increase in the rate of rent whereas the defendant was
offering the prevailing market rate which was admittedly even less
than the earlier rent.

It is categorically admitted in the written

statement that the defendant has been tendering rent at the rate of
Rs.72.85 per sq.ft. of super area per month ever since, which
translates to Rs. 2,18,550/- per month. It is also the case of the
defendant that since the portion taken on rent is a part of a larger area
taken on rent by the defendant in the same building, it was not

CS (OS) 535.06

Page 5 of180

possible to vacate only such a small portion while retaining the rest.
10.

The defendant has strongly placed reliance on clause 7(seven) of

the unregistered lease deed to aver that the premises were taken on
rent for an initial period of 9 years. However, contrary to its own stand
the defendant has averred in para 20 of Preliminary Submissions and
para 4 of the Parawise Reply on Merits of the Written Statement, as
well as in Ex-P1, Ex-P2 and Ex-P3 (three letters of the defendant to the
plaintiff dated 13.10.2004, 11.11.2004 and 17.12.2004) that the lease
expired in December 2004 and it had offered the plaintiff fresh lease
on the prevailing market rates. In the communication Ex. P-3, the
defendant had stated:“vide a letter under reference request was
made to you to agree for extending the lease
agreement for a further period of three years
with modified rate of rent and maintenance
charges.

Vide a letter under reference, you

have intimated your inability to accept the
offer............
In

the

unlikely

event

of

your

not

accepting our offer, you may kindly intimate us
accordingly so that we can make alternative
arrangement at the earliest.”
11. Defendant in para 2 and para 6 of Parawise Reply on Merits
challenged the very admissibility and validity of the said unregistered
lease deed, on clause 7 of which it is relying.
CS (OS) 535.06

Page 6 of180

12.

In para 13 of the Parawise Reply in the Written Statement the

defendant has admitted that the legal notice dated 16-1-2006 were
duly received by it, though it denies the contents of the said notice as
being frivolous, baseless and devoid of any merits or substance.
13.

Plaintiff in his application under Order 12 Rule 6 categorically

bases his claim for a decree of ejectment on the basis of the following
admissions:
•

the rent of the tenanted premises is over Rs 3500/-a month.

•

there exists no registered instrument of lease in respect of the
tenancy.

•

the lease was not renewed by the plaintiff after the initial period
expired.

•

the termination notice dated 16th January, 2006, by which the
tendency of the defendant was terminated, was duly received by
the defendant.

•

letters sent by the defendant elucidate expiry of the initial lease,
attempts being made by the defendant to renegotiate tenancy at
a rent lower than what was being paid under the initial lease,
categorical denial by the plaintiff to accept the said lower rate of
rent and the lease not being renewed.

14.

Plaintiff states that in view of the these categorical admissions

and failure on part of the defendant to raise any legally tenable and
valid defence in the written statement, a decree for possession should
be passed without waiting for determination of any other questions

CS (OS) 535.06

Page 7 of180

between the parties.
15.

Defendant filed its reply to the said application opposing the

application. It is averred that the matter being at an advanced stage
with the trial about to commence, the application of the plaintiff was
an abuse of process of law and could not be entertained. It is further
averred that the termination of tenancy/expiry of the initial lease are
facts which have to be proved by leading of evidence and the
defendant never admitted the said facts. Defendant claims that the
defence that the lease was subsisting, and was for a term of nine
years, in spells of three years, and it was the defendant alone who had
to exercise the option to retain the premises at the prevailing market
rate of rent, and that the lease was automatically extended after it
exercised the option on 13th of October 2004 and 17th of December
2004 when they entered into agreement with all other landlords of
other premises in the same building are disputed questions of fact
which need to be adjudicated before a decree can be passed for
ejectment. It is further averred that the lease being unregistered the
plaintiff cannot recover what has been given under an illegal and an
unenforceable contract.

The plaintiff is therefore precluded from

claiming escalation at the rate of 20% on the last paid rent and the
defendant is within its rights to claim renewal of the lease at the
prevailing market rate. It is also averred that the very act of giving of

CS (OS) 535.06

Page 8 of180

Notice of Termination shows that the intention of the plaintiff was
always to treat the lease as subsisting and thus the defendant could
not be evicted.
16.

While the defendant nowhere denies the receipt of the legal

notice dated 16.1.2006 in its written statement, and deals with the
specific averments made by the plaintiff in para 16 to 18 of the plaint
in this regard most evasively and by stating that the same is a matter
of record, in its reply to the application, the defendant also denies
admitting the receipt of the notice.

He further submits that the notice

of termination dated 16.1.2006, in any case stood waived by the
plaintiff since the plaintiff had accepted rent from the defendant even
for the period after the so called termination of the lease on 13.2.2006.
The plaintiff in the rejoinder to the reply filed by the defendant
categorically denied and controverted the stand taken by the
defendant and reiterated his case as well as his plea for a decree of
possession.
17.

In my view, the plaintiff has made out a case for passing of a

decree for ejectment of the defendant from the suit property on
account of the various relevant admissions contained on the record
and by application of settled law to the said facts.
18.

Before dealing with the specific facts of this case, I consider it

appropriate to notice the various judicial precedents relevant for this

CS (OS) 535.06

Page 9 of180

case.
19.

In Burma Shell Oil Distributing now known as Bharat

Petroleum Corporation ltd. Vs Khaja Midhat Noor and Others
reported as (1988) 3 SCC 44 it was held that where in the absence of
the registered instrument of lease, after the expiry of the initial lease
period the lessee continued to hold the property and the lessor
accepted the rent, the lease would be renewed from month to month
unless it was shown that it was for agricultural purposes. This was the
effect of Section 107 when read with Section 116 Of the Transfer of
Property Act.
20.

The aforesaid decision was followed by this court in Shukla

Malhotra & Ors. Vs M/s. Vyasa

Bank Ltd, 1998 III AD (Delhi)

628. This court while interpreting Section 107 of the Act held that the
said section prescribes the mode of making leases.

A lease of

immovable property for a term exceeding one year can be made only
by a registered instrument. This requirement of registration has to be
adhered to strictly, failing which any instrument purporting to lease out
the premises for a period exceeding one-year or extend it likewise
orally or in writing would be void. The presumption as to duration of
lease contained in Section 106 of the Act will apply. Accordingly the
tenancy will be created from month to month terminable by 15 days
notice as provided by section 106.

CS (OS) 535.06

In the said case the factum of

Page 10 of180

possession as a tenant as well as receipt of notice of termination under
Section 111 were both admitted by the defendant tenant. The court
allowed the application under Order 12 Rule 6 of the Code of Civil
Procedure and passed a decree for possession in favour of the plaintiffs
and against the defendant.

Reliance was also placed on a division

bench judgement of this court reported as Samir Mukherjee vs
Devinder Kumar Bajaj & Ors., 71 (1998) Delhi Law Times 477.
19.

In Surjit Sachdev vs Kazakhstan Invetment Services Pvt.

Ltd., 1997 II AD (Delhi) 518 it was held that admission may not be
made expressly in the pleadings and the court can proceed to pass a
decree in plaintiff's favour even on the basis of constructive
admissions. The purport of Oder 12 Rue 6 of the Code is to enable a
party to obtain speedy judgement at lease to the extent of the relief,
which, according to the admission of the other party he is entitled.
21.

In Atma Ram Properties Pvt Ltd vs Air India, 1997 I AD

(Delhi) 641 where the facts of the case were akin to the instant case,
the court rejected the plea of existence of the renewal clause in an
unregistered instrument. With regard to the defences set up by the
defendant it was observed and I quote :" invariably in all cases the defendant with a view
to getting over admitted fact which would clothe
the plaintiff with right to get a decree would come
forward with other pleas which are not only
specious but also seemingly arguable. In such
cases the court has perforce to undertake the
CS (OS) 535.06

Page 11 of180

task of going into the core of the issue and then
decide the point. If the other points raised by the
defendant', deserve to be considered, the court
can say that these points should be decided at
the time of the trial of the case. If the other
points are without any substance, the court in my
view, is bound in an application under Order 12
Rule 6 to consider and then pass the order. The
court has also to consider whether the
determination on those points could be done
without any evidence being let in by the parties
and whether the parties should be asked to go for
a trial of the case on those points."
22.

Learned counsel for the defendant on the other hand has placed

reliance in Shri Mohan Prasad Jha vs Shri Shambhu Prasad
Singh, 82(1999) DLT 281 to urge that where there are factual
disputes raised between the parties and there are no clear and
unequivocal admissions in respect of the particular facts which would
entitle the plaintiff to a decree as regards any of the claims, the
provisions of Order 12 Rule 6 of the code cannot be resorted to.
23.

Shri Mohan Prasad Jha (supra) is not applicable to the facts

of this case. In that case, the court found in the facts before it that
triable issues arise since the defendant had given details of payments
of rent made by him upto June 2000, while the notice of termination
purported to terminate the tenancy w.e.f 31.5.1997. The triable issue
was with regard to the legality of the notice of termination.
24.

In the present case, the relationship of landlord and tenant is not

denied by the defendant, and the defendant admits that it was a
CS (OS) 535.06

Page 12 of180

tenant of the plaintiff in the premises in question. The rate of rent is
undisputedly beyond Rs. 3500/- per month, even if it is taken for the
purpose of this application of Rs. 72.85/- sq. ft., which translates to Rs.
2,18,550/- per month. The tenancy is not protected by the Delhi Rent
Control Act, 1958. Admittedly, there is no registered lease deed, and
consequently, the lease could only be from month to month, assuming
for the sake of argument that, after the initial period of three years,
when the defendant reduced the rent from Rs. 95/- per sq. ft. to Rs.
72.85/- per sq. ft., the tenancy of the defendant continued. The
monthly tenancy, if any, could be terminated by issuance of a notice
under Section 106 of the Transfer of Property Act.
25.

The receipt of notice of termination dated 16 January, 2006 is

also admitted in the written statement, inasmuch as there is no denial
of the relevant averments in paras 16 to 18 of the plaint. Though
subsequently, the defendant seems to have become wiser and
attempted to resile from this admission in his reply to the Application
under Order 12 Rule 6 of the CPC filed by the Plaintiff. However, a
defendant cannot seek to impose his defence while filing a reply to an
application under Order 12 Rule 6 CPC than what is contained in the
Written Statement. While dealing with the application, the Court would
be guided by the defence set up in the Written Statement, particularly
where the endeavour is to wriggle out of an admission made in the

CS (OS) 535.06

Page 13 of180

Written Statement.

The correspondence admitted by the defendant

i.e. exhibit P-1 to P-9 leaves no doubt that the defendant made every
possible attempt to renegotiate the lease, after the original lease
period expired on 12 December 2004, at a lower rent than what was
being paid till that date and this offer was categorically rejected by the
Plaintiff. It is also admitted in the correspondence that due to the
aforesaid reason the lease was ultimately not renewed and the
defendant started paying rent/damages at a unilaterally fixed lower
rate than was being paid under the original lease. The defendant has
himself admitted that there is no registered lease deed between the
parties to the Lis and the unregistered document cannot be relied upon
to determine the terms of the lease. Clause 7 on which emphasis is
being laid is also a part of the said unregistered lease deed and cannot
confer a right to retain premises for a period of 9 years.
26.

The

ratio

of

Burma

Shell

Oil

(supra)

and

Shukla

Malhotra(supra) applies with full force and the tenancy after the
initial lease period could only be from month to month terminable by a
Notice of Termination/ Notice to Quit.

27. I find no merit in the contention of the defendant that there is a
waiver of the notice of termination by the plaintiff. I have perused the
notice of termination dated 16.1.2006 despatched on the same day
and would normally have been served within a matter of few days.
CS (OS) 535.06

Page 14 of180

Moreover, in the Written Statement, the defendant has not claimed
that the notice dated 16-01-2006 did not give a 15 clear days notice to
them.
28.

If the tenancy month is taken to be expiring on 13.2.2006, the

defendant had more than 15 clear days notice before the end of the
tenancy month. The notice clearly states that:“We, therefore, hereby serve you this notice of
termination on behalf of our Client and do terminate
your tenancy in respect of the Demised Premises
with effect from the close of the month of the
tenancy expiring on February 13, 2006. If according
to you, your month of tenancy expires on any day
other than as stated above, you may treat this notice
as terminating your tenancy, and your tenancy shall
stand terminated, with effect from close of the last
day of such month of tenancy as reckoned by you, so
as to give you clear 15 (fifteen) days of notice,
expiring with the last day of such tenancy month. On
the termination of your tenancy as aforesaid, you will
be required to hand over vacant possession of the
Demised Premises to our Client.”
29.

This notice I find is in complete conformity with Section 106 of

the Transfer of Property Act and consequently as the effect of
terminating the monthly tenancy of the defendant, assuming that one
existed at the relevant time.
30.

The submission of the defendant that there was a waiver of the

notice of termination by the plaintiff is also meritless. Apart from
merely stating that there has been a waiver, the defendant has failed

CS (OS) 535.06

Page 15 of180

to state as to how the said notice stood waived. The plaintiff has
clearly stated in para 21 of the plaint that post the termination, the
plaintiff had received two cheques dated 21.2.2006 and 7.3.2006 each
for a sum of Rs. 2,70,228/- tendered by the defendant for the months
of January-February, 2006 and February-March, 2006 purportedly
towards the rent of the said premises and for another flat bearing No.
B-103 belonging to the plaintiff out of which payment of Rs. 2,18,550/was towards the demised premises. The plaintiff has further stated that
he has not encashed these cheques. The defendant in his written
statement in reply to para 21 does not deny the factum of the cheques
not having been encashed by the plaintiff. Moreover, I find that the
plaintiff had moved an application bearing IA No. 3581/2006 under
Order 39 R. 10 CPC wherein, in para 10 it had been disclosed that two
cheques issued by the defendant purportedly towards rent of, inter
alia, the demise premises were lying unencashed. In the said
application this Court vide an order dated 17.5.2006 permitted the
plaintiff to encash the cheques without prejudice to the rights and
contentions of the parties. To constitute waiver there has to be clear
and unequivocal demonstration of intention to waive the rights, which
have accrued to a party. Even otherwise, it is a settled proposition of
law that mere acceptance of rent by the landlord from the tenant in
possession after the lease has been determined either by efflux of time

CS (OS) 535.06

Page 16 of180

or by notice to quit would not create a tenancy so as to confer on the
erstwhile tenant the status of a tenant as a right to be in possession
(see C. Albest Morris Vs. K. Chandrasekaren 2006(1) SCC 228).
31.

In the present case, no such intention of the plaintiff is

discernible far from demonstrating an intention to waive the notice, the
plaintiff did not encash the cheques and proceeded to file the present
suit on the strength of the notice of termination issued by him it
cannot, therefore, be accepted that there has been a waiver of his
rights by the plaintiff and the termination stands waived.
32.

The submission of the defendant that M/s Ansal Properties and

Industries Ltd. is a necessary party or that the said entity had acted on
behalf of the flat owners including the plaintiff while granting the lease
has no merit. Admittedly, the lease in respect of the suit premises was
entered into between the plaintiff on the one hand and defendant on
the other hand. No relief is being claimed by the plaintiff against M/s
Ansal Properties and Industries Ltd. Assuming for the sake of argument
that the said entity acted as the agent of the plaintiff for the purpose of
negotiation of the lease of the demise premises, that by itself would
not necessitate the impleadment of M/s Ansal Properties and Industries
Ltd. as a party to the suit. Since it is not necessary for me at this stage
to go into the issue whether the defendant could have reduced the
rent from Rs. 95 per square ft. to Rs. 72.85 per square ft. unilaterally, I

CS (OS) 535.06

Page 17 of180

am not going into the said issue.
33.

In the result, I find that the plaintiff has made out a

case for

grant of a partial decree for ejectment in his favour and against the
defendant in respect of the tenanted premises.

I allow the present

application with costs of Rs. 10,000/- and pass a decree of ejectment
against the defendant from the tenanted premises bearing commercial
flat No. B-102, on the 1st Floor in the Statesman House, Barakhamba
Road, New Delhi -110 001 having super area of 3000 sq. ft and the 8
(eight) car parking spaces bearing No. BB3 P01 to BB3 P08.
34.

Let the matter be listed for framing of issues, on other relief

prayed for in the suit on 09.07.2007.

February 27, 2007
mw

CS (OS) 535.06

VIPIN SANGHI
JUDGE

Page 18 of180

