*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+C.S. (OS) No. 3181/1988 & I.A. No. 1961/1989 and 2039/1989
Judgment reserved on: March 28, 2007
%

Judgment delivered on: July 27, 2007
M/s. Simplex Concrete Piles (India) Pvt. Ltd
..... Plaintiff
Through: Mr. V. P. Chaudhary, Sr. Advocate
with Ms. Sushma Sachdeva and
Mr. Nitinjya Chaudhary Advocates.
versus
Union of India
Through:

..... Defendant
Mr. Saleem Ahmed, Advocate.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

No

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

VIPIN SANGHI, J.
1.

By this order I proceed to dispose of the objections filed

by the parties before me to the Arbitral Award dated 31.10.1988,

CS(OS) 3181-1988

Page 1 of 16

made by the sole Arbitrator, Shri J.P. Singhal.
2.

Vide his letter dated 5th December 1988, the learned

Arbitrator had filed the award in Court to be made a 'Rule' of the
Court. Both the parties to the award, i.e., the claimant and the
respondent before the Arbitrator filed their objections on 15.2.1989
(registered as I.A. No. 1961/1989) and 7.2.1989 (registered as I.A. No.
2039/1989) respectively.
3.

Brief facts leading to the passing of the award are that

Union of India (referred to as 'respondent' hereinafter) had invited
tender for the work of construction of flyover at Lodhi Hotel intersection, New Delhi at an estimated cost of Rs.2,04,66,773/-. Work
contract was awarded to M/s. Simplex Concrete Piles India (P) Ltd.
(referred to as the 'Claimant' hereinafter) for Rs.2,48,85,564/- to be
completed within a period of 16 months starting 1.1.1981. However,
the work could not be completed in time, and was thus delayed by a
month, though extension had been granted for, upto 31.12.1982.
4.

Final Bill was raised and some deductions etc. were made

to the amount claimed and consequently differences/disputes arose
between the parties which were referred to the sole Arbitrator.
5.

The Claimant has objected to the award to the extent it

fails to award pendente lite interest to it as an error apparent on the
CS(OS) 3181-1988

Page 2 of 16

face of the award.
6.

The respondent has challenged the award so far as it

relates to claim nos.1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 13(iii) and 21.
Objections of Respondent:
7.

Claim No.1 for Rs. 28,30,000/- was made on account of

reduction of capacity of piles by the Respondent/Department, i.e.,
from 110 tonnes to 80 tonnes, which resulted in increase in the
number of piles by 82. It is alleged that the Arbitrator misconducted
himself in coming to the conclusion that the Claimants had, in
accordance with clause No.2.5.5 of the additional condition to the
agreement, offered a guaranteed safe load carrying capacity of 110
tonnes, inasmuch as, there was no acceptance of the above offer by
the Respondent. On the contrary the requirement of clause 2.5.3 of
the

agreement

required

the

claimant

to

submit

preliminary

calculations for arriving at the size, length and load carrying capacity
of the piles.
8.

It is also argued that the arbitrator also misconstrued the

provisions contained in clause No.2.4.2 of the agreement at page 135
which was binding on the Claimant. The Arbitrator construed the
clause to imply that trial bores and testing of soil samples was
primarily necessary for checking design of retaining walls etc., where
CS(OS) 3181-1988

Page 3 of 16

design of foundation was other than piles., whereas the words used in
the said clause were “...for checking and final design of the
foundations of flyover and its approaches at suitable location....” Thus
no distinction was made by the arbitrator whether foundations were
walls or concrete piles.
9.

It is alleged that the Arbitrator also misconducted himself

by holding that it was the field load test, which ought to have been
regarded, and the process static formula adopted by the respondent
ought to have been disregarded. As far as the field load testing was
concerned the Arbitrator ignored the provisions of clause 5.8.3 and
5.8.4 of IS:2911 Part 1 Section 1 1979 regarding the factor of safety
on the test load. The factor of safety adopted by the Claimant was `2'
only, whereas it ought to have been “2.5”.

Thus, the Arbitrator

erroneously upheld the contention of the Claimant that the fixation of
capacity of piles as 80 tonnes by the Respondent and its intimation to
the Claimant on 6.4.1981 was contrary to the provisions of the
agreement. This was also in violation of clause 4.3 of the agreement.
10.

The Arbitrator also erred in concluding that the value of 'K'

i.e. the co-efficient of the earth pressure fixed by the Respondent as
'1' was not correct and the value of 'K' adopted by the Claimants as '2'
was correct. In arriving to this conclusion the Arbitrator disregarded
CS(OS) 3181-1988

Page 4 of 16

and ignored the decision of a committee of 4 Chief Engineers and 4
Superintending

Engineers

assisted

by

the

concerned

executive

Engineers under the Chairmanship of the Additional Director General
(Bridges), the highest technical authority on bridges of the Ministry of
Surface Transport, Exh. No. R/155. Thus, the award of Rs.4,92,000/against above claim deserves to be set aside.
11.

The claimant had relied upon clause 2.5.5 whereby it was

for the claimant to lay down the safe load capacity of each pile and the
tender bid was to be based on that guaranteed safe foundation. The
Claimant has accordingly specified safe load carrying capacity of a 50
CM. dia pile as 110 tonnes. This, as per the Claimants, was duly
established by the load test conducted on the piles. The reduction of
capacity of each pile to 80 Tonnes from 110 tonnes by the
Respondents vide letter dated 7.4.1981 was therefore uncalled for.
This led to an increase in the work of pile caps and consequently
Claimant had to supply 82 extra piles than it would have supplied had
it not been for the above reduction of capacity.

Since the work of

installation of piles was a part of the works covered under lump sum
price, once the technical approach of design and execution of work
was disclosed by the contractor in its offer and on that basis the offer
was accepted, therefore, it was not open for the Respondent to
CS(OS) 3181-1988

Page 5 of 16

deviate from its stand.
12.

Claim No.2 was made on account of alleged increase in

reinforcement.

The

Arbitrator

proceeded

to

award

a

sum

of

Rs.20,388/- against the claim of Rs.57,500/- that was made. This is
allegedly in violation of provisions of clause 4.3 at pg 159 of the
agreement which provides that any modifications to design suggested
by Respondent in consultation with the Ministry of Shipping &
Transport were to be carried out by the Claimants without any extra
charge. As per the Claimant, the longitudinal reinforcement was
increased

arbitrarily

without

any

relevance

to

the

contract

specifications and, thus the claim was justified.
13.

Claim No.3 is regarding the increase in the size of pile caps

on account of increase in the number of piles. Claimants claimed Rs.
4,82,000/- on this account.

The Arbitrator granted a sum of

Rs.4,60,918/-. As per the Respondent, the Arbitrator has granted this
claim on the basis of his decision on claim 1. If the award in respect of
claim No.1 is rejected, this claim would also fall. Further, the Arbitrator
rejected the 'Truss Theory” based on para S.12 of IS:2911 Part 1
Section 1 and IS: 4556-1978. It is argued that the Arbitrator has not
given any indication as to the basis of calculations of the amount
awarded against this claim.
CS(OS) 3181-1988

Page 6 of 16

14.

Claim No.5 was on account of the two layers of water

bound mecadem laid under the approach slab and 75 mm thick layer
of bituminous mecadem on top of the approach slab which the
Claimant had to lay. This, according to Respondent, was not done on
the direction of the Respondent, but as an acute technical/contractual
requirement. Since, as per contract, the top of each carriage way was
to be kept at uniform level, and nothing was done beyond that,
therefore the award of Rs.1,43,000/- to the Claimant was not justified.
15.

Claim No.7 pertained to construction of railing and items of

work connected therewith. The Claimant had preferred a claim of
Rs.4,96,000/- under this head. Rs.2.5 lakh was claimed on account of
lump sum cost of 1 meter high railing provided on both sides of
carriageway and the remaining amount on account of RCC facia
provided on the safety kerbs. While the former was rejected in toto,
the claim on account of RCC facia was accepted

to the extent of

Rs.69,000/-. The respondents have challenged this on the ground that
the Arbitrator ignored the specific provisions of the agreed drawing
which formed part of the agreement in order to arrive at the above
conclusion and nothing could have been awarded under Claim 7.
16.

A bare perusal

of the award in respect of claim Nos.

1,2,3,5 and 7, as well as the objections raised by the respondents,
CS(OS) 3181-1988

Page 7 of 16

shows that they are touching upon the merits of the claims. Moreover,
they deal with highly technical and engineering aspects of the
contract.

The parties to the contract entered into an engineering

contract, to be executed by technicians and engineers.

Since the

disputes were of a technical nature, even the arbitrator appointed
appears to be a person with technical background and knowhow from
the Ministry of Urban Development, Government of India. I may notice
that no oral arguments were advanced by the respondents in support
of the objections on account of the highly technical nature of the
claims, the award and the objections. He has rendered his award in
respect of the aforesaid claims which, on the face of it, does not
disclose an error apparent on the face of the record. It is not for this
Court to sit as a Court of Appeal to re-appreciate the claims and
counter claims/counter statements of the parties on merits.

The

Arbitrator has interpreted the terms of the contract and on that basis
passed his award.

Consequently, the objections in respect of the

aforesaid claims are rejected.
17.

Claim 13(iii) was made on account of escalation of labour

wages during the currency of the contract. The Arbitrator awarded the
entire sum of Rs.4,15,750/- claimed by the claimant under this head.
18.

The Respondent has questioned the validity of the award

CS(OS) 3181-1988

Page 8 of 16

so far as it relates to this claim on the ground that the same is in
violation of clause 10-C-3 of the agreement which specifically provides
that the contractor shall be reimbursed with the actual expenditure
incurred by the contractor on account of statutory increase in wages.
It is contended that the Arbitrator awarded the said amount despite
failure on the part of the Claimant to adduce evidence of the actual
amount spent on account of increase in labour wages. The Arbitrator
on his own calculated the supposed additional liability which according
to him might have been incurred by the Claimant. Moreover, even
though the Arbitrator reached the figure of Rs.3,40,750/- as the
amount payable as per his calculations, still he proceeded to award a
sum of Rs.4,15,750/-. Thus, it is argued that the decision on claim
13(iii) is totally unsustainable and perverse and liable to be set aside.
To buttress this contention reliance has been placed on Associated
Engineering Co. Vs. Government of Andhra Pradesh and Anr.,
AIR 1992 SC 232.
19.

In that case, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that the

Arbitrator acted beyond his jurisdiction by traveling outside the
permissible territory provided by the contract between the parties
when the Arbitrator made an award in respect of a liability incurred on
account of escalation in labour wages, contrary to the terms of the
CS(OS) 3181-1988

Page 9 of 16

contract. It was observed:

20.

“A deliberate departure from contract amounts to
not only manifest disregard of his authority or a
misconduct on his part, but it may tantamount to
a mala fide action. A conscious disregard of the
law or the provisions of the contract from which
he has derived his authority vitiates the award.”
Coming back to the case before me, it may be relevant to

examine provisions of clause 10-C-3 of the Contract. The said clause
reads as follows:
“Labour:- If during the progress of the works,
wages of labour increases as a direct result of the
coming into force of any fresh law, or statutory
rule or order and the contractor thereupon
necessarily and properly pays of labour engaged
on the execution of the work such increased
wages, then the amount of the contract shall
accordingly be varied, provided always that any
increase so payable is not, in the opinion of the
Superintending Engineer (whose decision shall be
final and binding) attributable to delay in the
execution of the contract within the control of the
contractor.
Provided, however, no reimbursement shall
be made if such increase has become operative
after the contract or extended date of completion
of the work in question...
...The contractor shall for the purpose of this
condition, keep such books of account and other
documents as are necessary to show the amount
of any increase claimed or reduction available and
shall allow inspection of the same by a duly
authorised representative of Government and
further shall, at the request of the Engineer-incharge furnish, verified in such a manner as the
Engineer-in-charge may require any documents so
kept and such other information as the EngineerCS(OS) 3181-1988

Page 10 of 16

21.

in-charge may require.
The contractor shall, within a reasonable
time of his becoming aware of any alteration in
the price of any such wages of labour, give notice
thereof to the Engineer-in-charge stating that the
same is given pursuant to this condition together
with all information relating thereto which he may
be in position to supply.”
The Arbitrator was bound to proceed on the basis of the

evidence, if any, adduced in order to ascertain the liability of the
respondent on account of labour escalation. I should not be read as
holding that the claim was not admissible, for the contract did contain
a stipulation as to reimbursement to contractor of the amount spent
due to labour escalation. The error lies not in upholding the liability but
in the manner the liability was ascertained, calculated and fastened on
the respondent in contravention of the said clause 10-C-3. No evidence
was led by the claimant in support of this claim.

There was no

material on record before the Arbitrator to award the amount of
Rs.4,15,750/- to the claimant. Thus, the award so far as claim 13(iii) is
concerned, is vitiated by misconduct and liable to be set aside.
22.

Claim 21 pertains to pre-suit, pendente lite and future

interest on the awarded amount. The Arbitrator awarded pre suit
interest (from 31.3.1983 till 23.8.1983) and future interest (from date
of his award till payment) @ 10% per annum on Rs.19,54,189/-.
However, pendente lite interest was refused.
CS(OS) 3181-1988

Page 11 of 16

23.

Both the parties i.e. respondent as well as the claimant

have challenged the award so far as it relates to this claim. The
respondent is aggrieved by the award of pre suit interest and contends
that an arbitrator is not a court and therefore, could not have awarded
pre-suit interest. The Claimant, on the other hand, is aggrieved by the
refusal by the Arbitrator to award pendente lite interest on the
awarded amount.
24.

The respondents contention is that the award, so far as it

refuses pendente lite interest, in perfectly valid and in consonance
with the law as it was interrupted at the relevant time. The award was
passed before the decision of the Supreme Court in Secretary,
Irrigation Department, Government of Orissa Vs. G.C. Roy, AIR
1992 SC 732 was pronounced, and at the relevant time it was the
decision in Executive Engineer, Irrigation, Galimala & Ors. V.
Abhaduta Jena, (1988) 1 SCC 418 which held the field. As per the
said decision, Arbitrator was not considered a `court' and was
therefore not considered competent to award pendente lite interest.
Moreover, even when the decision in Abhaduta Jena (supra) was
overruled by G.C. Roy (Supra) it was prospectively overruled. The
Supreme Court restricted the application of G.C. Roy (supra) to
pending proceedings. Since the Award had already been passed, G.C.
CS(OS) 3181-1988

Page 12 of 16

Roy (supra) would not apply to the present case.
25.

The claimant on the other hand has not disputed that G.C.

Roy(supra) is to be given effect prospectively and it would only apply
to matters pending at the time the said decision was pronounced. His
contention is that since these objections filed by both the parties were
already pending before this Court, when the said decision was
pronounced, G.C. Roy (supra) would apply to this case.
26.

The question that needs to be answered is whether

proceedings for making the award rule of the court are “matters
pending” as contemplated by the court in G.C. Roy's case (supra)?
27.

A matter may be considered to be not pending when it has

been finally disposed of by a court or authority and nothing more
needs to be determined/or nothing survives for determination. In case
of an Arbitration Award made under the 1940 Act, a peculiar feature of
the award is its un-enforceability till it is made Rule of the court/decree
of a court. Therefore, every award passed has to be filed before the
court and the court is duty bound to give notice to the parties and
consider the objections, if any, raised by any of the parties against the
award. [See (2002) 6 SCC 437]. Even if no objections are filed by any of
the parties, the court is still obliged to consider whether the award
calls for interference or not, and if not, whether to make it a Rule of
CS(OS) 3181-1988

Page 13 of 16

the Court. It is only when the award is made a `Rule' of the Court and
a decree is passed which has attained finality, can it be said that the
proceedings have become final. [See (2001) 3 SCC 277].
28.

Therefore, till the objections filed in pursuance of the

notice of filing of the award in court are pending, or awards has not
been made decree of the court, it cannot be said to be final. Similarly,
if an appeal is preferred from the decision of the court making the
award a `Rule' of the Court, or allowing all or any of the objections to
the award, since an appeal is a continuation of the

original

proceedings, it would follow that the award would still not be
considered as “final”. In DDA v. Wee Aar Constructions Builders
& Anr, 2004 VIII AD (Delhi) 33 and Sudhir Brother v. DDA, 2001 II
AD(Delhi) 325, this Court has also applied the decision in

G.C.Roy

(supra) to cases similar to the present. I may also refer to the decision
of the Supreme Court in 1999(2) SCC 594. The Supreme Court, while
granting pendente lite interest observed as follows:“In the cases at hand, the awards have not
been made rule of the court so far and are
being so made by the court today. The award
of interest pendente lite by the arbitrator
deserves to be sustained.”
29.

In view of the above discussion, there is no merit in the

CS(OS) 3181-1988

Page 14 of 16

submission of the respondent and the petitioner is held to be entitled
to pendente lite interest (during arbitration proceedings) on the
awarded amount @ 10% per annum.
30.

As

far

as

pre-reference

interest

is

concerned,

the

respondent has contended that since no notice under the interest Act
was received from the claimant, the arbitrator acted beyond his
powers in awarding pre-reference interest. The claimant has in reply
relied on Ex. C-91, dated 17.9.1982 which has also been relied upon
by the Arbitrator while awarding pre suit interest. Since the Arbitrator
has come to this conclusion on the basis of the evidence adduced
before him, it is not for this Court to interfere in the award so passed.
Thus, grant of pre-reference interest cannot be disturbed by this
Court.
31.

Consequently, the objections of the respondents to claim

No.21 is rejected while the objections to the non grant of pendente lite
interest raised by the claimant is allowed.
32.

In view of the aforesaid, the award passed by the learned

arbitrator is made a rule of the Court and the decree is passed in
terms thereof except in respect of claim no.13(iii). To that extent the
award is set aside. The claimant shall also be entitled to pendente lite
interest @ 10% per annum.
CS(OS) 3181-1988

Page 15 of 16

33.

The claimant shall also be entitled to future interest from

the date of the decree till payment or realization @ 8% per annum, in
case the decreetal amount

is not paid within three months from

today.

(VIPIN SANGHI)
JUDGE
July

, 2007

P.K.Babbar/as

CS(OS) 3181-1988

Page 16 of 16

