*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI
Date of decision: 27th August, 2007

+
%

W.P. (C) No. 1242-44/2006
Union of India & Others.
.....Petitioners
Through: Mr. R.V. Sinha with Mr. A.S.
Singh, Advocates
versus
Yashpal & Others
..... Respondents
Through: Mr. D.R. Gupta, Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
VIPIN SANGHI, J (Oral)
1.

Rule D.B. With the consent of parties we have heard

final arguments and proceed to judgment.
2.

The Petitioner, Union of India, has filed this Writ

Petition to impugned the order dated 11.12.2005 passed by the
Central Administrative Tribunal, Principal Bench, New Delhi (the
Tribunal) in O.A. No. 1756/2004. The Tribunal by the said
impugned order has quashed and set aside the order dated
W.P. (C) No. 1242-44/2006

Page 1 of 8

19.7.2004 passed by the Petitioners whereby the Respondents
(applicants before the Tribunal) were sought to be reverted from
the post of Superintendent, Group B to the post of Inspector. The
Tribunal

further

directed

the

Petitioner

to

continue

the

Respondents as Superintendent, Group B, as if they had never
been reverted.
3.

The Respondents were working as Inspectors with the

recommendation of Commissioner, Customers Excise, New Delhi.
The next promotional post is that of Superintendent, Group B.
One of the essential conditions prescribed under the relevant
promotion Rules was that the Inspectors should have 8 years
experience as Inspector for being promoted to the post of
Superintendent, Group B.
4.

In July 2002, the Petitioner held a DPC meeting to

consider the eligible candidates for the post of Superintendent,
Group B, Central Excise. However, the Respondents and some
other Junior officers in the grade of Inspectors were not
considered for promotion even though they had the requisite
qualifying service of 8 years as Inspectors. One Mr.Ghasi Ram
Meena, and other eligible candidates, who were not considered
by the DPC, for promotion to the post of Superintendent, Group B,
challenged their exclusion from consideration by filing O.A. No.
W.P. (C) No. 1242-44/2006

Page 2 of 8

2475/2002 titled as Ghasi Ram Meena vs. Union of India. The
reason for their exclusion from consideration was that some of
their seniors did not have the requisite experience of 8 years
service in the grade of Inspectors. This O.A. was allowed by the
Tribunal on 11.11.2003 and the following directions were issued:
“(a) that the claim of the applicants should
be
considered
for
promotion
to
Superintendent Group 'B' irrespective of the
fact that their seniors had not fulfilled
minimum qualification of 8 years of service.
(b) that the claim of the applicants can be
considered only if they also fulfil the said
qualifications as per the recruitment rules on
a specific date for a particular year; and

5.

(c) necessarily their claim has to be
considered in accordance with the rules and
instructions regarding which no further
opinion need be expressed. They should be
within the zone of consideration besides
being eligible.”
Consequently, the review DPC was held by the

Petitioner in February 2001 which considered the cases of the
Respondents including others and the Respondents came out
successful in the said selection process. They were accordingly
promoted to the post of Superintendent, Group B vide order No.
18/2004 dated 12.2.2004 with effect from 23.9.2002.
6.

After the Respondents had joined the promotional

post, as a bold from the blues, without any prior notice they were

W.P. (C) No. 1242-44/2006

Page 3 of 8

served with the order of reversion dated 19.7.2004 whereby they
were reverted to the post of Inspectors. As aforesaid this order
was challenged by the Respondents before the Tribunal.
7.

The

Petitioner

justified

the

reversion

of

the

Respondents on the ground that consequent upon the Central
Board of Excise and Customs granting relaxation of qualifying
service prescribed under the Recruitment Rules by one year to
the Inspectors who did not have the qualifying service of 8 years
in that grade, the Petitioner prepared the consideration list
seniority wise which included the names of those Inspectors who
had

completed

7

years

of

service

as

on

1.1.2002

for

consideration by a review DPC. The Petitioner contended that as
a result of relaxation, a number of Inspectors who were seniors to
the

Respondents

became

eligible,

and

their

cases

were

considered by the review DPC. The vacancies were consumed by
senior Inspectors and no vacancies were left to accommodate the
Respondents who were juniors in the feeder cadre. Therefore, the
Respondents were reverted to their substantive post of Inspector.
8.

The Tribunal did not accept the aforesaid justification

given by the Petitioner and in our view, rightly so. The reasoning
adopted by the Tribunal is contained in para 6 and 7 of the
impugned order and the same reads as follows:
W.P. (C) No. 1242-44/2006

Page 4 of 8

“6. We have heard both the counsel and
perused the pleadings as well. It is admitted
position that in July 2002, when DPC met for
the first time to consider the names of
Inspectors for promotion to the posts of
Superintendent, applicants were eligible as
they did have 8 years of qualifying service,
yet they were not considered simply on the
ground that their seniors did not have
qualifying service of 8 years as Inspector.
The law is well settled that when the
Recruitment Rules specify the procedure
how promotions are to be made, DPC has to
be convened in accordance with those rules.
In the process if certain seniors are to be left
out because they did not have qualifying
service, juniors cannot be ignored simply on
the ground of seniors not fulfilling the
criteria even though they fulfilled the
criteria. It is also not disputed by the
Respondents that applicants were indeed
eligible to be considered for promotion in
July 2002 itself. Therefore, when some other
persons, who are also eligible and were not
considered by the DPC, filed O.A. before the
Tribunal. The Tribunal gave directions as
mentioned in para 4 above after considering
the judgments given by Hon'ble Supreme
Court in the case of R.Prabha Devi and Ors.
vs. Government of India, through Secretary,
Ministry
of
Personnel
and
Training,
Administrative Reforms (JT 1988 (1) SC 488)
and Scientific Advisor to Raksha Mantri and
Anr. vs. V.M. Joseph (1998 (5) SCC 305)
wherein it was held that when certain length
of service in a particular cadre is prescribed
then unless a person possesses that
qualification, he cannot be considered
eligible for promotion. If a junior is eligible,
then a senior automatically will not become
eligible because seniority cannot be
substituted for eligibility. It was thus
directed by the Tribunal to consider the
W.P. (C) No. 1242-44/2006

Page 5 of 8

applicants for promotion to the post of
Superintendent Group B irrespective of the
fact that their seniors have not fulfilled the
minimum qualification of 8 years of service.
This judgment was given on 11.11.2003 and
it was pursuant to this direction, that
Respondents considered the claim of the
applicants also while conducting review DPC
because they were similarly situated as the
applicants in O.A. No. 2475/2002. After
holding the review DPC, applicants were
promoted vide order dated 12.2.2004 and
their seniority was also fixed by the said
order (page 10). Now once they were
promoted after following due process of law,
that too pursuant to the directions given by
the Tribunal, naturally a right accrued in
favour of the applicants before us to
continue in the posts of Superintendent
Group B uninterruptedly. They could be
reverted only for valid reasons that too after
following due process of law. In the instant
case, admittedly before reverting the
applicants, no show cause notice was given
to them. Therefore, reversion order is liable
to be quashed on this very ground. It goes
without saying that the order of reversion
would have civil consequences and would
definitely affect the rights of applicants.
Therefore, the same could not have been
issued without giving show cause notice to
the applicants.
7.
Even though the order is liable to be
quashed on this very ground, but even
otherwise we find the way Respondents
have proceeded in this matter is absolutely
unknown to the settled principles of law. As
we have stated above, the judgment in O.A.
No. 2475/2002 dated 11.11.2003 had
already been complied with in February
2004 itself. Now once the vacancies had
already been filled from amongst the eligible
W.P. (C) No. 1242-44/2006

Page 6 of 8

9.

candidates who fulfilled the eligibility criteria
as on the cut off date, naturally their rights
could not have been affected by a
subsequent letter dated 18.6.2004, on the
ground that relaxation is being given to the
senior Inspectors from a retrospective date.
Even otherwise, so long the eligible
candidates were available in the department
as per the Recruitment Rules, there was no
justification to relax the eligibility condition
only to accommodate the senior Inspectors
as that would be contrary to the judgments
given by the Hon'ble Supreme Court. In any
case, since applicants were already
promoted, if at all Respondents wanted to
consider the senior Inspectors also by giving
them relaxation to make them eligible, they
could have considered them for the left over
vacancies in case there were any left over
vacancies. This also gets support from
Respondent's counter where in page 2 they
have stated that the Board issued directions
for filling up of entire Group B Ministerial
and non-Ministerial posts, which were
created as a result of cadre restructuring of
Central Excise Department and remained
unfilled due to non-availability of eligible
candidates
with
prescribed
qualifying
service by relaxing the qualifying service by
one year. This sentence makes it clear that
only unfilled vacancies were to be filled from
amongst those seniors who were to be given
the benefit of relaxation of one year for
making them eligible for consideration for
the post of Superintendent Group B.”
Before us, Learned counsel for the Petitioner could not

dispute the position that the promotion of the Respondents was
done by a regularly held DPC by following the Recruitment Rules.
The promotions of the Respondents were not ad-hoc or stop gap

W.P. (C) No. 1242-44/2006

Page 7 of 8

arrangements. Having promoted the Respondents on a regular
basis, they could not have been reverted to the lower post of
Inspector except in accordance with law as a measure of penalty.
Even if relaxation of qualifying service was granted to those
Inspectors who were senior to the Respondents, to make them
eligible for being considered for promotion to the post of
Superintendent, Group B, such Inspectors could be promoted
against any unfilled vacancies that might have remained unfilled
after the promotion of the Respondent had been made. There
was no question of the Petitioner's holding a review DPC to
reconsider the cases of the Respondents, once they have been
regularly promoted.
10.

In the light of the aforesaid we find no error in the

judgment of the Tribunal, which is well reasoned and considered.
We accordingly dismiss the present petition.

VIPIN SANGHI, J.

A.K. SIKRI, J.
August 27, 2007
P.K. BABBAR

W.P. (C) No. 1242-44/2006

Page 8 of 8

