HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI
OMP No. 7 OF 2006 & OMP No.29/2006
Judgment reserved on: July 17, 2007
Judgment delivered on:
December 28, 2007.
#
!

M/s. Alcove Industries Ltd
Through:

..... Petitioner
Mr. A.S.Chandhiok, Senior
Advocate with Mr. Sanjay
Abbot, Advocate.

versus
$
^

M/s. Oriental Structural Engineers Ltd
..... Respondent
Through: Mr. P. V. Kapur, Senior
Advocate with Mr. Anil Airi,
Advocate.

*CORAM
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

VIPIN SANGHI, J.
:
1.

By this order, I propose to disposed of OMP No.7/2006

and OMP No.26/2006 both preferred by the Petitioner under Section 12
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as
the `Act') seeking removal of respondent no.2, (the Sole Arbitrator)
and appointment of an independent and impartial arbitrator in his
place. Since, most of the facts and contentions are common to both
the petitions, I am disposing them off by a common judgment, while
OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 1 of 55

making a note of the differences in facts and submissions in the two
petitions.
Background facts
2.

The

respondent

no.1

i.e.

M/s

Oriental

Structural

Engineers Ltd had been awarded the work for conversion of existing
road to four lane by widening and strengthening of the existing road
starting from 140 km to 180 km and 180 km to 240 km in the State of
Bihar, Aurangabad sector by the National Highway Authority of India
(NHAI). This contract is referred to as the Principal Contract. In turn,
respondent no.1 awarded a part of the work to the petitioner for the
quarrying of rock boulders including transportation and feeding into
crusher vide work order dated 19.12.2000. (OMP No.7/2006 has been
preferred in relation to the Arbitration proceedings arising out of this
work order).

Vide separate work order dated 03.07.2002, various

earth works to be done at the said road stretch were also awarded to
the

petitioner.

(OMP

No.29/2006

pertains

proceedings arising out of this work order).

to

the

Arbitration

Though the works

commenced, soon thereafter certain safety issues were raised by the
petitioner which ultimately led to the works coming to a halt. Various
correspondences were exchanged between the parties and each found
the other in the wrong for the works not being performed under the
contract. Consequently, disputes and differences arose between the
parties. The work order/agreement dated 19.12.2000 contained an
OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 2 of 55

arbitration agreement in clause 23 in the following terms:“23. All disputes in this contract shall be
decided by an Arbitrator to be appointed by
the Managing Director, Oriental Structural
Engineers Ltd., New Delhi subject to the
provisions of Indian Arbitration and Conciliation
Act, 1996. The matter shall be under the
jurisdiction of Delhi Courts only.”

3.

The work order dated 03.07.2002 also contained an

identical clause viz. clause No.26.
4.

The

petitioner

invoked

the

arbitration

agreement

contained in clause 23 vide its letter dated 23.6.2003 and called upon
the respondent no. 1 to suggest names of three retired High Court
Judges from amongst whom one could be appointed as the sole
arbitrator.
5.

However,

clause

23

of

the

work

order/agreement

provided that appointment of any arbitrator was to be made by the
Managing Director of the Oriental Structural Engineers Ltd, New Delhi
(the respondent no.1 herein).
6.

The respondent no. 1 in its reply dated 01.07.2003 called

upon the petitioner to submit its claim before the Managing Director for
consideration of the matter.

It appears that the petitioner filed a

petition under Section 9 of the Act being OMP No.276/2003 seeking
certain interlocutory reliefs and measures.

OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

This petition is stated to

Page 3 of 55

have been listed before the Court on 16.07.2003, and notice was
issued by the Court returnable on 19.08.2003. Thereafter, respondent
no. 2 was appointed as the Sole Arbitrator by the respondent no.1 vide
letter dated 25.8.2003.

The Sole Arbitrator i.e. respondent No.2

entered upon the reference on 27.8.2003.
7.

On 17.9.2003 the petitioner requested the Sole Arbitrator

to make a declaration as to his independence and impartiality. It was
stated that as per the petitioners information, the respondent No.1 had
done a lot of work with the Airport Authority of India (AAI) while the
respondent No.2 was working for them. Vide letter of even date, the
respondent no. 1 was also requested to furnish the details of works
done by them for Airport Authority of India (AAI)

during the period

when respondent no. 2 was holding various posts with the AAI.
8.

Both the respondents vide their separate letters dated

23.9.2003 replied to the two letters dated 17.9.2003. The respondent
no.2 in his reply stated that in the past he had no relations with
respondent no.1 except for working as an Arbitrator/member, Dispute
Review Body in respect of some works executed by the respondent no.
1 for various Government Departments. Respondent No.1 also denied
any suggestion that it had done any works as contractors under
respondent No.2.
9.

Thereafter, for about 16 months there was no further

interaction between the petitioner and the sole Arbitrator. Vide letter
OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 4 of 55

dated 21st January, 2005 the respondent no. 2 called upon the
petitioner to submit its statement of claim along with documents.
10.

Petitioner responded with a letter dated 18.2.2005

expressing surprise at receiving the letter from respondent No.2 after
such length of time, and also stated that they were under the
impression that he had rescued himself in the matter. The petitioner
also sought certain information with regard to the outcome of the other
arbitration proceedings involving respondent no.1 wherein respondent
no.2 was acting as an Arbitrator.
11.

Since no reply was received, the petitioner again wrote

to respondent No.2 on 21.4.2005 that on account of lack of any
response from him to the letter dated 18.2.2005, it would be presumed
that the arbitrator has recused himself in the matter. Vide reply dated
29.4.2005, respondent no. 2 denied the suggestion that he has
recused himself from presiding as the Sole Arbitrator in the arbitration
in question. It was also pointed out that, though in last five years he
has been appointed as one of the Arbitrators in three arbitral tribunals
involving respondent no.1, no award has been passed in any of those
proceedings.
12.

The petitioner not having doubts with regard to the

independence and impartiality of respondent no.2 to act as the sole
Arbitrator preferred this petition on 07.01.2006.
13.

After the petition was filed, an amendment application

OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 5 of 55

being IA No.12365/2006 was moved in November, 2006 by the
petitioner to amend the petition in the light of the facts disclosed in the
reply filed by the respondent No.1 and for the purpose of introducing
an additional ground for declaring that the mandate of the Sole
Arbitrator stood terminated viz., that he had failed to act without
undue delay.

This application was allowed by me vide order dated

23.10.2007.
14.

In OMP No.29/2006, vide letter dated 16.12.2005 the

arbitration agreement contained in Clause 26 of the relevant work
order dated 3.7.2002 was invoked and respondent No.1 appointed
respondent No.2 as the arbitrator in this dispute also. This petition has
also been filed on the ground that the sole Arbitrator i.e. respondent
No.2 has lost his mandate on account of his de jure inability to function
as an arbitrator due to the existence of justifiable grounds about his
independence and impartiality.
Petitioner's submissions:
15.

The respondents have consistently failed to make a full

disclosure of the relevant facts with regard to the past association of
respondent no.2 with respondent no.1 and his involvement with the
principal contract, of which the petitioner is awarded sub-contracts.
There is a conscious effort on the part of the respondents to hold back
and suppress the relevant information, which has trickled in from time
to time during the course of correspondence exchanged with the
OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 6 of 55

respondents and also in the course of these proceedings.

The

disclosures made by the respondents from time to time with regard to
the inter se dealings and association between the respondents give
rise to justifiable doubts as to the independence and impartiality of
respondent no.2 to act as the sole Arbitrator in the arbitral proceedings
in question. The reply of respondent no.1 to the petition reveals that
the arbitrator has complete personal knowledge of the project, and the
principal contract.

Admittedly, he is the

Chairman of the Dispute

Review Board for contract Package IV-D i.e. the Principal Contract, in
relation to which the petitioner has been issued the two work orders as
a sub-contractor.

Admittedly, the second respondent is required to

make 3 site visits every year to ascertain the projection conditions and
status of work. He has personal knowledge of the conditions in which
the work was to be performed by the petitioner which is bound to
influence his objectivity in deciding the disputes between the parties
and create a prejudice in his mind against the petitioner.

Merely

because the petitioner has agreed that respondent No.1 may nominate
the Arbitrator, it does not mean that the nominee can be a person who
is personally involved with, or aware of the circumstances in which the
contracts were being executed, since the petitioner had not agreed to
nomination of an arbitrator with such association with one of the
parties or with such personal knowledge or involvement in the
execution of the contracts. Respondent No.2, while functioning as the

OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 7 of 55

Chairman of the Dispute Resolution Board in relation to the principal
contract would be confronted with, inter alia, the same issues which
would need determination in arbitration in relation to the contracts in
question, though the petitioners would not be involved in the former
process. The views that he may form in those proceedings are bound
to influence his determination in the Arbitration proceedings in
question between the petitioner and respondent No.1.

Respondent

No.2 therefore suffers from de jure inability from functioning as an
arbitrator in relation to the contracts between the parties and he has
lost his mandate to so act.
16.

As aforesaid, by way of an amendment which has been

allowed by me, an additional ground has also been introduced in OMP
No.7/2006 to say that the Arbitrator has failed to act without undue
delay and on that account his mandate stands terminated. Since OMP
No.29/2006 has been filed in respect of appointment of respondent
No.2 as arbitrator made only on 16.12.2005, the issue of delay does
not arise in this petition.
17.

Learned Senior counsel for the petitioner Mr. A.S.

Chandhiok has relied upon State of Arunachal Pradesh v. Subhas
Projects and Marketing Ltd. & Anr. 2007 (1) Arb. LR 564 (Gauhati)
(DB) and Shyam Telecom Ltd. V. Arm Ltd. 113 (2004) DLT 778 to
support the contention that this court has the jurisdiction to interfere
under Section 14 of the Act, when the mandate of the Arbitrator stands
OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 8 of 55

terminated. Reliance has also been placed on Indira Rai & Anr. v.
Vatika Plantations P. Ltd. 127 (2006) DLT 646 to say that once the
Arbitrator nominated by a party loses his mandate, the court is not
powerless to appoint a substitute. Saurabh Kalani v. Tata Finance
Ltd. & Anr. 2004 (1) Recent Arb. Judgments 120 (Bom) has

been

relied to say the Arbitrator is duty bound to disclose informations which
may give rise to an apprehension of bias. He relies on the tests laid
down therein for determining the aspect of possible bias.
Respondent's submissions:
18.

The respondent no. 1, first and foremost submitted that

these petitions are not maintainable in law.

The procedure to

challenge the authority and competence of an arbitral tribunal, and the
grounds on which the same can be challenged are contained in
Sections 12 and 13 of the Act. The petitioner had raised a challenge to
the authority and competence of respondent no.2, and the same has
been rejected by him.

Accordingly, the arbitral tribunal is now

competent to proceed with the reference and make the arbitral award.
The petitioner can now raise a further challenge, if it is still aggrieved,
only after the arbitral award is made, at the stage of filing objections to
the award under Section 34 of the Act. It is argued that the legislature
has consciously prescribed the aforesaid procedure to minimise
interference by the courts in the progress of the arbitral proceedings at
intermediate stages, so that the arbitral proceedings are taken up
OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 9 of 55

expeditiously. Reference was also made to Section 5 of the Act which
prohibits

judicial

authorities,

which

includes

civil

courts,

from

intervening in matters covered by Part I of the Act, except to the
extent provided by Part I of the Act. The respondent also submits that
the mere appointment of respondent no.2 as the Chairman of the
Dispute Review Board does not impinge on his independence as an
arbitrator in resolving the inter se disputes between the petitioner and
respondent No.1.
19.

Mr. P.V. Kapur, learned Senior counsel appearing for the

respondent

placed

reliance

upon

G.

Vijayaraghavan

V.

M.D.,Central Warehousing Corporation & Anr, 86(2006) DLT 844 ;
Trishul

Construction

Co.

V

Delhi

Development

Authority,

1994(2) ALR 303 ; Novel Granites Ltd V. Lakhmi General Finance
Ltd, 2003 (supl.) ALR 286 (Mad) to contend that mere appointment of
the same person as an arbitrator in more than one matters by a party,
or existence of a relationship of employer and employee between a
party and the arbitrator does not, of itself, give rise to a justifiable
doubt of bias or impinge on the independence or impartiality of an
arbitrator.

It does not constitute a ground for termination of the

mandate of the arbitrator by the Court, as it does not constitute de jure
inability to perform the functions of an Arbitrator.
20.

Reliance

has

been

placed

upon

Bharat

Heavy

Electricals Ltd V. C.N. Garg & Ors, 88(2000)DLT 242 (DB) ;
OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 10 of 55

Unipack Industries V. Subhash Chand Jain & Ors, 2002(61) DRJ
586 ; Dharam Prakash V. Union of India & another, 2007 III A.D.
(Delhi) 103; M/s Newton Engineering and Chemicals Ltd. v.
Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. & Ors. 2006 IX AD (Delhi) 243, to
buttress the contention that once as arbitrator stands appointed as per
the procedure agreed to by the parties for his appointment, the
mandate of the arbitration can be challenged before the arbitrator
himself only as per the procedure provided under Section 13 of the Act
and if that fails, under Section 34 of the Act and there is no other
provision under which arbitrator can be removed by the Court.
21.

As far as ground of undue delay on the part of the

Arbitrator in proceeding with the reference in relation to work order
dated 19.12.2000 is concerned, the submission of the respondent is
that the said ground is an afterthought inasmuch, as, the same was not
even taken as a ground in the petition as originally filed. The delay, if
any, is also stated to be solely attributable to the petitioner as it failed
to file its statement of claim in time.

Reliance has been placed on

P.C.Sharma & Co.(M/s) v. DDA and Others, (2006)VI AD(Delhi)548
in this regard.
Discussion & Decision:
22.

It is well settled that the mere erroneous mention of a

legal provision in a petition does not effect the maintainability of the
petition itself, if otherwise, the court has the jurisdiction to entertain
OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 11 of 55

the petition and the petition itself discloses a cause of action. The
mention of section 12 in the title of the petition therefore is not
conclusive as to the nature of the petition, and its title would not be
determinative of the issue of its maintainability before this court. (See
1999 (V) AD Delhi 52, 2001 IV AD Delhi 870).
23.

To the extent that the Respondent contends that there

is no power of removal of an arbitrator under the Act, the submission of
the Respondent is well founded. Unlike the Arbitration Act 1940 (see
Sections 5, 11 and 12 of the 1940 Act), the act contains no provision
for the removal of the arbitrator on any ground. However, by virtue of
section 14(1) of the Act, the mandate of an arbitrator terminates if one
or more of the contingencies specifically provided for therein occur.
Section 14(1) of the Act reads as follows: “14. Failure or impossibility to act –(1) The
mandate of an arbitrator shall terminate if (a)
he becomes de jure or de facto unable to
perform his functions or for other reasons fails
to act without undue delay; and
(b)
he withdraws from his office or the
parties agree to the termination of his
mandate.”.
24.

This means that the termination of the mandate of the

arbitrator upon the occurrence of any of the said contingencies is
automatic by sheer force of law, i.e. ipso jure. There may be cases
where there may be no scope at all for the parties to get into a
OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 12 of 55

controversy with regard to the automatic termination of the mandate
of the arbitrator, such as, where he is declared to have become
insolvent or insane, and such determination has attained finality, or
where he may have suffered from such a debilitating diseases or
ailment which robs him of his mental faculties. However, there may be
cases where one party is of the view that the Arbitrator has ipso jure
lost his mandate, while the other contends that the mandate of the
arbitrator still subsists. When such a controversy arises, the same is to
be resolved by the court by virtue of section 14(2) of the Act, which
reads as under.
“14(2)
If a controversy remains concerning
any of the grounds referred to in clause (a) of
sub-section (1), a party may, unless otherwise
agreed by the parties, apply to the Court to
decide on the termination of the mandate.”
25.

Therefore, a petition under Section 14(2) of the Act, to

determine the issue as to whether the mandate of the arbitrator stands
terminated on the occurrence of one or more of the contingencies
contained in clauses (a) and (b) of Section 14(1) of the act would be
maintainable.

While deciding a petition under Section 14(2) of the

Act, all that the court does is to declare whether the termination of the
mandate of the arbitrator ipso jure has taken place or not. To that
extent, the order of the court passed under Section 14(2) of the Act is
merely declaratory, and is not in the nature of a mandatory or
perpetual injunction to remove the arbitrator or to restrain him from
OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 13 of 55

acting as an arbitrator. Removal of an arbitrator postulates that the
arbitrator is otherwise vested with mandate to proceed to function as
an arbitrator, but the Court, for certain reasons, removes or dislodges
him from that position. What follows post that declaration is a different
matter. If the Court finds that the mandate of the Arbitrator stands
terminated, it may or may not proceed to supply the vacancy,
depending on the facts and circumstances of a particular case.
However, merely because the Court may in the facts of a given case
declare that the mandate of the existing Arbitrator stands terminated
and thereafter proceeds to fill up the vacancy, that would not
tantamount to the removal of the Arbitrator by the Court.
26.

To determine whether a petition is one falling within the

scope of Section 14(2) of the Act, one must look to the averments
made in the petitions.

In the two petitions before me the primary

submission of the petitioner is that the arbitrator, i.e. Respondent No. 2
is de jure unable to perform his functions as an Arbitrator inasmuch,
as, there is a justifiable and reasonable apprehension of bias against
him on account of his past dealings/association with respondent No.1
as respondent No.2 has been appointed in various arbitral proceedings
as an arbitrator, wherein respondent No.1 is a party. It is also argued
that on account of his personal involvement with the principal contract,
as the Chairman of the Dispute Resolution Board under that contract
between Respondent No. 1 and the employer i.e. NHAI, Respondent

OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 14 of 55

No.2 is de jure disqualified to function as an Arbitrator. In that capacity
respondent No.2 is obliged to make repeated visits to the site of the
contracts between the petitioner and Respondent No.1, and therefore,
has personal knowledge, information and involvement with the said
contracts.

It is also argued that the conduct of the respondents in

holding back information with regard to their past associations,
dealings and the involvement of Respondent No.2 with the contract in
question gives rise to justifiable doubts as to the independent and
impartiality of Respondent No.2 and this makes him de jure unable to
perform his function as an arbitrator.
27.

In one of the petitions, namely OMP No.7/2006, the

additional submission is that the arbitrator has failed to act without
undue delay and therefore has lost his mandate.
28.

The aforesaid submissions of the petitioner need to be

examined in greater detail which I shall presently be doing. However,
in view of the said averments and arguments, it is clear that the
present petitions disclose a cause of action for maintaining these
petitions under Section 14(2) of the Act and I accordingly hold so.
29.

I now turn to deal with the primary objection of the

respondent that the challenge to the authority and competence of the
sole Arbitrator raised under Sections 12 & 13 of the Act having been
raised and turned down, it is not open to the petitioner to now file a
petition under Section 14 of the Act, and the petitioner has no option at
OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 15 of 55

this stage but to participate in the Arbitral proceedings. It is argued
that if he is still dissatisfied with the Awards that may be rendered by
the sole Arbitrator, it would be open to him to challenge the arbitral
awards under Section 34 of the Act, and in that process the petitioner
may raise a challenge to the authority and competence of the
Arbitrator as well before the Court. For this he relies on sub-Sections
(4) and (5) of Section 13, which read as under: “13. ..................
(4)
If a challenge under any procedure
agreed upon by the parties or under the
procedure under sub-section (2) is not
successful, the arbitral tribunal shall continue
the arbitral proceedings and make an arbitral
award.
(5)
Where an arbitral award is made under
sub-section (4), the party challenging the
arbitrator may make an application for setting
aside such an arbitral award in accordance with
section 34.”
30.

It is often said that haste makes waste. The object of the

Act is not merely to see that, good or bad, an arbitral award comes into
existence at the earliest.

The object is to see that the proceedings

come to a finality without the intervention of the Court, unless such
intervention by the Court is warranted in a given case and the same is
permitted by the law. It would serve no purpose, and would rather be
a wasteful expense of time and resources, if the arbitral proceedings
which ought to be interdicted are allowed to continue and culminate

OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 16 of 55

into an award, which would not stand scrutiny in the eyes of law. A
stitch in time saves nine. Therefore, if a lacuna is found in the arbitral
proceedings, such as, a

justifiable apprehension of bias of an

Arbitrator, it would be best to see that the law (as contained in Section
14 of the Act) is given effect to with promptitude and a declaration
made of the event that has, in law, already taken place i.e. the
termination of the mandate of the Arbitrator and, if the facts of the
case so warrant, to substitute or facilitate the substitution of another
independent Arbitrator so that the proceedings can be held in a legal
and sustainable manner.
31.

Those who are opposed to any kind of intervention by the

Court during the pendency of the arbitral proceedings, even when the
same, and to the extent the same is expressly permitted by the law,
fail to see that timely interference by the court in deserving cases
leads to saving of time rather than its wastage, between the point in
time that the arbitration proceedings commence and up till the time
when the arbitral award becomes enforceable as a decree of the Court.
An award does not become enforceable till the objections thereto
under Section 34 of the Act are dismissed, if preferred.

Even if the

stage for holding an enquiry with regard to the termination of mandate
of an Arbitrator is postponed to the post award stage i.e. under Section
34 of the Act, that enquiry, in any event, would have to be undertaken
and would consume the same amount of time, effort and expense, and

OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 17 of 55

lead to the same result, as a petition under Section 14 of the Act would
take, if is entertained during the pendency of the arbitral proceedings.
Therefore, to my mind it would not adversely impact the amount of
time it takes to bring the arbitral award to fruition. On the other hand,
timely surgery could remove the malingent and fatal lacunas in the
arbitral proceedings and set them on the right course to produce an
award bereft of such infirmities. After all, this enquiry would have to
be taken once, whether it is under Section 14 or section 34 of the Act.
If it is undertaken under Section 14 and it fails, the said finding would
obviously bind the parties and the objecting party would be precluded
from raising the same all over again on the same facts and
circumstances.
32.

The philosophy behind the earlier view of the Supreme

Court in relation to the nature of power exercised by the Chief Justice
while dealing with an application under Section 11 of the Act while
holding the said power to be an administrative power, was that the
arbitration process should be set in motion at the earliest without
wastage of time and without entertaining any contentious issues raised
by a party objecting to the appointment of an Arbitrator. However, this
view was subsequently rejected in SBP & Co. v. Patel Engineering
Ltd., (2005) 8 SCC 618, when the Supreme Court realised that such
routine appointment of an Arbitrator by treating the power as an
administrative one was leading to great prejudice in cases where the

OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 18 of 55

appointment of the Arbitrator was not at all called for. The Court held
the power of appointment of an Arbitrator under Section 11 to be a
judicial power of the Chief Justice since it saw reduction in judicial
interference during the course of the arbitration proceedings by
adopting such a view.

Paragraph 32 of Patel Engineering Ltd.

(supra) is relevant and the same reads as follows: “32. Moreover, in a case where the objection
to jurisdiction or the existence of an arbitration
agreement is overruled by the Arbitral Tribunal,
the party has to participate in the arbitration
proceedings extending over a period of time by
incurring substantial expenditure and then to
come to the court with an application under
Section 34 of the Arbitration Act seeking the
setting aside of the award on the ground that
there was no arbitration agreement or that
there was nothing to be arbitrated upon when
the Tribunal was constituted. Though this may
avoid intervention by court until the award is
pronounced, it does mean considerable
expenditure and time spent by the party before
the Arbitral Tribunal. On the other hand, if
even at the initial stage, the Chief Justice
judicially pronounces that he has jurisdiction to
appoint an arbitrator, that there is an
arbitration agreement between the parties,
that there was a live and subsisting dispute for
being referred to arbitration and constitutes
the Tribunal as envisaged, on being satisfied of
the existence of the conditions for the exercise
of his power, ensuring that the arbitrator is a
qualified arbitrator, that will put an end to a
host of disputes between the parties, leaving
the party aggrieved with a remedy of
approaching this Court under Article 136 of the
Constitution. That would give this Court, an
opportunity of scrutinising the decision of the
Chief Justice on merits and deciding whether it
calls for interference in exercise of its plenary
power. Once this Court declines to interfere
OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 19 of 55

with the adjudication of the Chief Justice to the
extent it is made, it becomes final.
This
reasoning is also supported by sub-section (7)
of Section 11, making final, the decision of the
Chief Justice on the matters decided by him
while constituting the Arbitral Tribunal. This
will leave the Arbitral Tribunal to decide the
dispute on merits unhampered by preliminary
and technical objections.
In the long run,
especially in the context of the judicial system
in our country, this would be more conducive to
minimising judicial intervention in matters
coming under the Act. This will also avert the
situation where even the order Chief Justice of
India could be challenged before a Single Judge
of the High Court invoking Article 226 of the
Constitution or before an Arbitral Tribunal,
consisting not necessarily of legally trained
persons and their coming to a conclusion that
their constitution by the Chief Justice was not
warranted in the absence of an arbitration
agreement or in the absence of a dispute in
terms of the agreement.”
33.

Similarly, in my view, it would not serve any meaningful

purpose to negate the rights of a party which are statutorily granted
under Section 14 of the Act, on account of the desire to see that the
arbitral proceedings are not allowed to be stalked or interfered with at
the behest of one of the parties during their progress. To deny such a
right would be in the teeth of the law. Of course, it would be for the
Court to evaluate in the facts of a given case whether there is any
merit in the petition or it is merely a delaying tactics on the part of the
petitioner.
34.

A Division Bench of this Court in Surinder Pal Singh vs.

HPCL & Anr. 2007 (2) RAJ 364 (Del) has also held that in the event of
OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 20 of 55

a dispute regarding termination of mandate of an arbitrator, for the
reasons contained in Section 14(1), the issue has to be resolved only
by the Court. Thus, a party intending to have the issue regarding
termination of mandate resolved, has to apply to the competent court
under Section 14(1) & (2) of the Act.
35.

In Arun Kapur vs. Vikram Kapur, 2002 (4) RAJ 414 (Del)

this Court cited with approval the following observations made in
United Indian Insurance Co. Ltd. v. M/s Kumar Texturisers and
Anr. AIR 1999 Bom 118;
“It is therefore clear that a Court can intervene only
in the event of a remedy is provided under the Act.
The Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 which
hereinafter shall be referred to as the Act of 1996,
has repealed as Arbitration Act, 1940 and the
Foreign Award Act, 1961 as also another legislation.
One of the main objects of the Act is to minimise
the supervisory role of Courts in the arbitral
process. The question which has arisen, therefore,
will have to be decided by considering Section 5
and the object for which the Act of 1996 has been
enacted.”
“The court can intervene also on an application
under Section 14(2) of the Act of 1996. In other
words, a conjoint reading of Section 5, Section 34,
Section 37 and Section 14(2) of the Act of 1996 will
show that the Court can intervene only in cases
covered by Section 14, Section 34 and Section 37.”
36.

Thus, it was held that Section 5 does not operates as a bar

or in any way curtail the remedy available under Section 14 of the Act.
37.

The purpose of Section 14 is

thus clearly to prevent an

Arbitrator, who has inter alia, become de jure or de facto unable to
OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 21 of 55

perform his functions as an Arbitrator from dragging a party though
the process of a long wait or futile arbitration proceedings which may
adversely affect his rights or impose on him financial liability.
38.

The object of the new Act is undoubtedly to encourage

resolution of disputes expeditiously. So Section 5 of the Act proscribes
the Courts from interfering in matters governed by Part I of the Act,
except where interference by Courts is expressly permitted by the said
part. Therefore, to the extent that the legislature in its wisdom has
statutorily permitted intervention by Court for certain purposes, the
language of this provision would have to be interpreted in such a
manner as to allow full play to those provisions and not to render
otiose a remedy that has been specifically provided for. One has also
keep in mind that the language of Section 5 is restrictive in nature and
seeks to take away jurisdiction which otherwise vests in a civil Court.
Such a provision, therefore, has to be construed strictly.

Section 5

cannot be waived as a red herring to ward off a petition under Section
14 of the Act.
39.

I may note that the decision in Dharam Prakash (supra),

Bharat Heavy Electricals (supra) and Unipack (supra) do not take
note of Section 14 of the Act and can not be treated as precedent so
far as interpretation of Section 14 of the Act is concerned.
40.

Section 12 of the Act casts a duty on the Arbitrator to

disclose in writing at the outset, such facts which may give rise to
OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 22 of 55

justifiable doubts as to his independence or impartially. This obligation
continues throughout the arbitral proceedings i.e. whenever such facts
come into being during the arbitral proceedings. Therefore, what the
law stipulates as a disqualification to become or remain an Arbitrator
in a given dispute, is not the existence of actual bias, but the existence
of such facts and circumstances as are “likely to give rise to justifiable
doubts as to his independence and impartiality”. An Arbitrator may be
challenged only on limited grounds i.e. if circumstances exist that give
rise to justifiable doubts as to his independence or impartiality or that
he does not possess the qualifications agreed to by the parties. Even
this challenge is limited only to such cases where the party raising the
challenge who has participated in the appointment of the Arbitrator
becomes aware of the grounds on which the challenge is made after
the Arbitrator has been appointed. Therefore, if a party was aware of
such facts and circumstances at the time of participating in the
process of appointment of the Arbitrator as would otherwise be
considered good enough to give rise to justifiable doubts as to the
independence or impartiality of the Arbitrator, that party is dis-entitled
from challenging the Arbitrator on the same ground.

Moreover, the

challenge is required to be made within 15 days of the party learning
of the relevant circumstances. If the challenge is not made in a timely
manner, the same may fail as having being condoned and waived on
the ground of his acquiescence in the holding of further proceedings.

OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 23 of 55

41.

The procedure for challenge to the authority of the

arbitrator is contained in Section 13. The Arbitrator is empowered to
rule on this issue. However, his decision (if he overrules the objection)
is not final and is open to judicial review by a competent Court in
exercise of the power conferred by Section 34 read with 13 (5) of the
Act.

No doubt Section 13(4) states that if the challenge under the

procedure agreed upon by the parties or under the procedure
prescribed by sub-Section (2) is not successful,

the arbitral Tribunal

shall continue the arbitral proceedings and make the arbitral award.
What this means is that the party challenging the Arbitrator cannot
endlessly enter into a dialogue or argument with the Arbitrator on the
same issue and after the said challenge is rejected by the Arbitrator,
the Arbitrator shall be entitled to proceed with the Arbitral proceedings
and to make his award. The party raising the challenge cannot validly
refuse to participate in the Arbitral proceedings and stall the same.
Section 13(5) also shuts out a challenge to the determination of the
Arbitrator with regard to his competence and authority under Section
13 as an interim award, lest the same is challenged under Section 34
of the Act by the aggrieved party even before the culmination of the
arbitral proceedings into a final award on the merits of the claims and
counter claims, if any.

One cannot read into the said provision a

limitation on the right of one or the other party to move the Court
under Section 14 of the Act on the ground that the Arbitrator has

OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 24 of 55

become de jure and de facto to unable to perform his functions. In that
sense the Act does not contemplate an election of one or the other
remedy by the aggrieved party to choose between the remedy under
Sections 12 & 13 on one hand, and the remedy under Section 14 on
the other hand.
42.

In M/s Transcore V. Union of India, AIR 2007 SC 712,

the Supreme Court while considering the remedies available under the
Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement
of Security Interest Act, 2002 (referred to by the Supreme Court as the
NPA Act) and the Recovery of Debts due to Banks and Financial
Institutions Act, 1993 considered the applicability of doctrine of
election and opined as follows:“There are three elements of election, namely,
existence of two or more remedies; inconsistencies
between such remedies and a choice of one of
them. If any one of the three elements is not there,
the doctrine will not apply. According to American
Jurisprudence, 2d, Vol. 25, page 652, if in truth
there is only one remedy, then the doctrine of
election does not apply. In the present case, as
stated above, the NPA Act is an additional remedy
to the DRT Act. Together they constitute one
remedy and, therefore, the doctrine of election does
not apply. Even according to Snell's Equity (Thirtyfirst Edition, page 119), the doctrine of election of
remedies is applicable only when there are two or
more co-existent remedies available to the litigants
at the time of election which are repugnant and
inconsistent. In any event, there is no repugnancy
nor inconsistency between the two remedies,
therefore, the doctrine of election has no
application.”

OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 25 of 55

43.

Applying the aforesaid guidelines in the present case, I am

of the view that there is no inconsistency between the remedies
available to a party under Sections 12 and 13 on the one hand and
Section 14 on the other and the invocation of one remedy by a party
does not restrict that party from invoking the other remedy as well. In
fact these remedies appear to be constitute a single scheme, wherein
the aggrieved party would first be expected to challenge the arbitrator
under Sections 12 and 13, and if that fails, and the party is still
aggrieved, and can make out a case of de jure or de facto inability of
the Arbitrator to act, to move the Court under Section 14.
44.

A perusal of Section 34 of the Act would show that the

grounds on which the mandate of the Arbitrator terminates, i.e. (i) his
de facto and de jure inability to perform his functions as an arbitrator;
(ii) his failure to act without undue delay; (iii) where he withdraws from
office for any reason; (iv) by agreement of the parties [(i) & (ii) fall
under Section 14 and (iii) & (iv) fall under Section 15] are not made
specific grounds on which an award may be set aside by the Court,
though it may be successfully argued that some, if not all of these
grounds can be brought under clause (v) of Section 34(2)(a) or Section
34(2)(b)(ii) of the Act. This means that the party desiring to challenge
the mandate of an Arbitrator could move a petition under Section 14 of
the Act when the cause of action for the same arises, and he cannot be
expected to raise the said challenge only after the making of the

OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 26 of 55

award. In fact, his failure to take timely action in a given case may find
him facing an objection on the ground of waiver and acquiescence.
45.

It is well-settled that an Arbitrator with regard to whom

there is a reasonable apprehension of bias renders himself de jure
unable

to

perform

his

functions.

The

perceived

impartiality

independence of the Arbitrator lies at the core of his mandate.
46.

“Commercial Arbitration” by Sir Michael J. Mustill and

Stewart C. Boyd, Second Edition at page 247 deals with the capacity
and qualifications of the Arbitrator. The learned authors state:
“An arbitrator cannot be validly appointed unless
he possesses the qualifications required by the
common law and by the arbitration agreement.
Consequently1.
He must have the capacity which the law
requires of every person who assumes the office
of arbitrator.
2.
He must possess all the qualifications, and
none of the disqualifications, prescribed by the
arbitration agreement.
3.
He must be free from any such connection
with the parties, or with the subject matter of
the dispute, as would make him, or appear to
make him, incapable of acting in an impartial
manner.
Although
these
three
requirements
are
commonly treated together, as aspects of the
same problem, they are not all of the same
character. The second is a true qualification. If
this requirement is not satisfied, the person
appointed is not in truth an arbitrator at all, and
has no power to make a binding order or award.
The first and third requirements are of a
different kind. Failure to satisfy them does not
make the appointment a nullity. It simply gives
the Court power, if it thinks fit, to ensure that
the arbitrator is no longer left in charge of the
OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 27 of 55

reference.”
47.

The learned authors observe (page 250) that the general

principles of law relating to bias apply in the same way to arbitrations
as they apply to other tribunals.

Bias may arise either from a

relationship between the Arbitrator and one of the parties, or from a
relationship between the Arbitrator and the subject matter of the
dispute. Actual bias arising from relationship between the Arbitrator
and one of the parties is almost impossible to prove.

It is not,

however, necessary to go as far as establishing actual bias, for the
Court will in appropriate cases intervene if facts are proved which
would lead a reasonable person, not knowing the Arbitrator's true state
of mind, to think it likely that there was bias.

The learned authors

further comment that “ A person who is approached with a request to
act, and knows that he has some kind of relationship with one of the
parties, should remember that there is no keener sense of injustice
than is felt by someone who has doubts about whether the arbitrator is
doing his honest best. He should also bear in mind that the question is
not just whether he really is impartial, but whether a reasonable
outsider might consider that there is a risk that he is not. If the person
nominated considered that a reasonable outsider might (not should)
take this view, he should decline to act. If he considers that the case is
on the borderline, he should disclose the circumstances which might
give rise to suspicion: and he will very often find that no objection is

OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 28 of 55

taken to his appointment: candour is always the best way to prevent
misunderstandings.
The other type of bias results from a connection, not
between the arbitrator and a party, but between the arbitrator and the
subject matter of the reference.”
48.

The learned authors, while dealing with the aspect of

removal of Arbitrator (which is permitted under the English Law)
observed that the power of removing the Arbitrator

embraces

situations in which, although the Arbitrator has not necessarily acted
unfairly, he has allowed himself to get into a position where unfairness
might reasonably be suspected or foreseen. The Arbitrator must not
only show no bias, but must also

appear to be in a position to act

judicially and without any bias.

The remedy (of removal of an

Arbitrator), is therefore, likely to be confined to those cases where the
arbitration simply cannot be allowed to continue with the particular
arbitrator in office –either because he has shown actual or potential
bias or because his conduct has given serious grounds for destroying
the confidence of one

or both

parties in his ability to conduct the

dispute judicially or competently.
49.

I may notice that though the aforesaid observations are

made in relation to the power of removal of an Arbitrator (which, as
noticed by me,

is not provided for under the Act), the same are

relevant since the aforesaid rationale for removal of an Arbitrator is
OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 29 of 55

also the rationale for the automatic termination of the mandate of an
Arbitrator on account of his de jure inability to function as an
Arbitrator.
50.

This Court in V.K. Dewan & Co. vs. Delhi Jal Board

2004 (3) RAJ 32 (DEL) has observed that “only a well founded and
justifiable doubt about the arbitrator covered by section 12 of the Act
can be made a ground for terminating the mandate of an arbitrator.”
51.

In Saurabh Kalani (supra), the Bombay High court has

discussed the law on the subject exhaustively and in para 8 observed:
“In the light of the decided cases, it is abundantly
clear that in considering the question as to whether
a judge or an Arbitrator, is liable to be disqualified
in the facts of a given case on the ground of bias
the test to be applied is whether the circumstances
are such as would lead a fair minded and informed
observed to conclude that there was a real
possibility that the Judge or Tribunal was
biased......”
52.

The respondents have placed heavy reliance on M/s.

Newton Engineering and Chemicals Ltd. (supra) decided by a
learned Single Judge of this Court.

In that case the petitioner had

preferred a petition under Section 11(6)(c) read with Sections 13 & 15
of the Act, seeking a direction for the filing of the arbitration
agreement and the appointment of an independent Arbitrator under
the arbitration agreement contained in Clause 18 of the contract. The
disputes were to be referred by the aggrieved party to the sole
arbitration

of

the

OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Executive

Engineer

(NR)

of

the

respondent
Page 30 of 55

corporation. If the Executive Director (NR) was unable or unwilling to
act as the Arbitrator, the matters were to be referred to the sole
arbitration of a person nominated by the Executive Director (NR) in his
place.

When the petitioner invoked the arbitration agreement, the

respondent replied stating that the office of the Executive Director (NR)
had ceased to exist and required the petitioner to send a written
confirmation giving their consent to the substitution of the named
Arbitrator with Director (Marketing) of Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. The
respondent by stating that the petitioner was willing to have an
arbitration whereunder each party would appoint one Arbitrator. This
proposal was rejected by the respondent on the ground that under the
agreement only a sole Arbitrator could be appointed. The respondent
also expressed its willingness to hold arbitration by the Director
(Marketing) or his nominee since the post of Executive Engineer (NR)
had ceased to exist. The petitioner sought to nominate one Arbitrator
and some time later took the stand that since the respondent had
failed to nominate the second Arbitrator, they had forfeited their right
to make an appointment.

The respondent did not agree to the

unilateral appointment of an Arbitrator by the petitioner. Thereupon
the petitioner took the stand that in the aforesaid circumstances the
only option left was to approach the Court for appointment of a sole
Arbitrator unless its claims are settled. In the meantime, the Director
(Marketing) of respondent No.1 appointed a sole Arbitrator.

OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

The

Page 31 of 55

Arbitrator entered upon the reference and required the petitioner to
file its statement of claim within 30 days. Thereafter, the petitioner
filed the aforesaid petition seeking appointment of an independent
Arbitrator since the arbitration agreement could not be implemented in
toto as the office of the appointing authority had been abolished in the
meantime. It was the petitioner's case that the Arbitrator nominated
by the Director (Marketing) had no mandate to act as the sole
Arbitrator. On the other hand, the respondent's contention was that
there was no provision in the Act, which empowered the Court to
remove an Arbitrator who had entered upon the reference and that the
only procedure prescribed by the Act, which was open to the petitioner
was to take recourse to the provisions of Section 13(2) of the Act. In
response to the plea of the petitioner that it was invoking Section 14 of
the Act, the submission of the respondent was that reliance placed on
Section 14 was misplaced, as Section 14 presupposes that the
Arbitrator had a mandate which has been terminated. However, in that
case, the stand of the petitioner was that the Arbitrator appointed by
the Director (Marketing) had never had any mandate to act as an
Arbitrator. The Court gave its view in the following words: “If, as is the case of the petitioner, the Arbitrator
appointed by the respondent No.1 had no mandate,
the question of its termination does not arise. If, on
the contrary, he enjoys a mandate, the case is
squarely covered by Section 13(2) of the Act, which
provides that a party who intends to challenge an
Arbitrator shall, within fifteen days after becoming
aware of the constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal or
OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 32 of 55

after becoming aware of any circumstances referred
to in Sub-section (3) of Section 12, send a written
statement of the reasons for the challenge to the
Arbitral Tribunal.
Sub-section (3) of Section 13
provides that unless the Arbitrator challenged under
sub-section (2) withdraws from his office or the other
party agrees to the challenge, the Arbitral Tribunal
shall itself decide on the challenge. Sub-section (4)
lays down that if the challenge is not successful, the
Arbitral Tribunal shall continue the arbitral
proceedings and make an arbitral award.
Subsection (5) provides that where an arbitral award is
made under sub-section (4), that is, in the teeth of
the challenge to the Arbitrator, the party challenging
the Arbitrator may make an application for setting
aside such an arbitral award in accordance with
Section 34. Thus, the entire procedure for challenge
to the appointment of an Arbitrator is delineated by
Section 13.
18. In order to contend that Section 14 of the Act
had no application to the facts of the present case,
learned counsel for the respondents placed reliance
upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case
of M/s Grid Corporation of Orissa Ltd. (supra).
In the said case where a conjoint petition under
Section 11(6) and Section 14 of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996 was filed, the Hon'ble Supreme
Court made the following pertinent observations at
page 206 of the Report:
“2. Let it be stated at the very outset
that a conjoint petition under Section 11(6)
and section 14 of the Act would not lie for
the simple reason that the petition under
Section 11(6) is to be heard and decided by
the Chief Justice or any person or institution
designated by him while a petition under
section 14 of the Act lies to the
Court..................””
53.

Before proceeding further to deal with the observations

made by the court in M/s Newton Engineering & Chemicals Ltd.

OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 33 of 55

(supra), at this stage itself I may notice that the present is not petition
under Section 11(6) of the Act and it is not the jurisdiction of the Chief
Justice under that section which has been invoked by the petitioner. It
is the jurisdiction of the Court which has been invoked as reside in
Court by virtue of Section 14 of the Act. Moreover, in M/s Newton
Engineering & Chemicals Ltd. (supra) the Court has not gone into
the issue whether the grounds giving rise to justifiable doubts about
the independence and impartiality of an Arbitrator does tantamount to
a de jure inability on the part of the Arbitrator to proceed with the
reference. The Court also did not examine and comment on the
maintainability of a petition under Section 14 of the Act when a ground
of reasonably apprehended bias against the Arbitrator is sought to be
raised.
54.

In M/s Newton Engineering & Chemicals Ltd. (supra)

the Court relies on Pinaki Das Gupta vs. Publises (India)
Communications & Ors. 115(2004) DLT 345. It appears that it was
not brought to the notice of the Court that Pinaki Das Gupta (supra)
was a judgment rendered on 07.10.2004 i.e. before the decision of the
Supreme Court in SBP & Co. (Supra). The entire judgment in Pinaki
Das Gupta (supra) is founded upon the earlier view of the Supreme
Court in Konkan Railway Corporation Ltd. vs. Rani Construction
Pvt. Ltd. (2002) 2 SCC 388, which was expressly overruled by the
Supreme Court in SBP & Co. (Supra).

OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Similarly,

it appears it was

Page 34 of 55

not brought to the notice of the Court that the decision in M/s Grid
Corporation of Orissa Ltd. Vs. M/s AES Corporation & Ors. JT
2002(8) SC 203 was also a decision of the pre SBP & Co. (supra)
age, when the power under Section 11 of the Act was considered to
be an administrative power.

The distinction in the nature and

character of the power and function i.e. administrative under Section
11 and judicial under Section 14 led the Supreme Court to observe
that a conjoint petition under these provisions could not lie. Whether,
after the judgment of the Supreme Court in SBP & Co. (supra) such a
conjoint petition can be maintained is a moot question, which, does
not arise in the present case.
55.

In paragraphs 21 & 22 of Newton Engineering & Chemicals

Ltd. (Supra) the Court gave its opinion in the following words: “21. A conjoint reading of Sections 11, 12, 13, 14
and 15 contained in Chapter III of the Act and
Section 16 contained in Chapter IV of the Act impels
me to hold that Section 13 of the Act visualises a
“Challenge Procedure” where the mandate of the
Arbitrator is challenged by one of the parties to the
arbitration whereas Section 14 of the Act deals with
the failure or impossibility of the Arbitrator to act on
account of other circumstances such as his inability
to perform his functions on account of death,
resignation or other reasons, his withdrawal from his
office or the parties agreeing to the termination of
his mandate. Section 15 lays down the procedure
to be followed upon the termination of the mandate
of the Arbitrator inter alia in the circumstances
referred to in Section 13 or Section 14. Thus, in a
sense, Sections 13 and 14 are to some extent
overlapping, in as much as the words contained in
Section 14(1)(b) that the mandate of an arbitrator
OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 35 of 55

shall terminate if “he withdraws from his office or
the parties agree to the termination of his mandate”
are contained in Sub-section (3) of Section 13 which
provides that unless the Arbitrator “withdraws from
his office or the other party agrees to the
challenge”, the arbitral tribunal shall decide on the
challenge. Section 15, as already stated, provides
for the procedure to be followed upon termination of
the mandate of the Arbitrator and for substitution of
Arbitrator in the circumstances set out in subsection (1) including those referred to in Section 13
or Section 14, Sub-section (2) of Section 15
expressly stipulates that where the mandate of an
Arbitrator terminates, a substitute Arbitrator shall
be appointed according to the Rules that were
applicable to the appointment of the Arbitrator
being replaced.
22. In the present case, the petitioner instead of
pursuing the course available to him for challenging
the Arbitrator as laid down in Section 13 has sought
appointment of a substitute Arbitrator through this
Court on the ground that the post of Executive
Director
(NR)
having
been
abolished,
the
respondents could not have appointed an Arbitrator
of their choice. Such a plea, in my considered
opinion, is not open to the petitioner for the reason
that Section 13 clearly provides that unless an
Arbitrator on the objection of the party challenging
his appointment recluses himself/ withdraws himself
from the arbitration, or unless the other party (the
respondents herein) agrees to the termination of his
mandate, the only way open to the petitioner is to
wait for the Arbitrator Tribunal to decide on its
challenge (Sub-section (3) of Section 13). If such a
challenge is not successful, the petitioner shall then
have the right to challenge the award made by the
Arbitral Tribunal in accordance with Section 34 of
the Act (Sub-section (5) of Section 13).”
56.

The conclusion of the Court is contained in para 24 which

reads as follows: “24. To conclude, I have no hesitation in holding
OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 36 of 55

that there is no provision in the Act empowering this
Court to terminate the mandate of the Arbitrator
who has entered upon the reference and/or to
substitute the same with an Arbitrator appointed by
this Court. The necessary corollary is that the
challenge to the appointment of the Arbitrator must
be raised by the petitioner before the Arbitrator
Tribunal itself. If such challenge succeeds, the
petitioner shall have no cause for grievance left. If,
however, the petitioner is unable to succeed before
the Arbitral Tribunal, it shall have no option except
to participate in the arbitral proceedings and if
aggrieved by the arbitral award, to challenge the
same in accordance with the provisions of Section
34 of the Act.”
57.

It would be seen that in M/s Newton Engineering &

Chemicals Ltd. (supra) the petitioner had not challenged the
Arbitrator under Section 13 of the Act, which is a material distinction
from the facts of the present case. In relation to the scope of Section
14 the Court observed “Section 14 of the Act deals with the failure or
impossibility of the Arbitrator to act on account of other circumstances
such as his inability to perform his functions on account of death,
resignation or other reasons................”.

Firstly, it is clear that the

court gave only a few illustrations when section 14 may be invoked, as
is clear from the use of the word “such as”. The court did not
pronounce upon the scope of section 14(1) so as to exhaust all cases
of de jure or de facto inability of the arbitrator to so act. In my view
there is nothing to suggest that justifiable doubt about the integrity
and impartiality of an Arbitrator is not a ground good enough to
terminate the mandate of an Arbitrator. As noticed hereinabove, this is
OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 37 of 55

also the view taken by this Court in other cases.

Even from the

conclusion drawn by the learned Judge in M/s Newton Engineering
& Chemicals Ltd. (supra) I cannot draw any inference that the Court
has held that in an appropriate case the remedy under Section 14 of
the Act cannot be invoked by an aggrieved party, merely because it is
open to him to raise the challenge before the Arbitrator under Section
13 read with Section 12 which he may or may not have invoked. In
fact, the court has held that section 13 and 14 are to some extent
overlapping. To read the said judgment as prohibiting a resort to
Section 14 of the Act in an appropriate case would be doing violence to
Section 14 itself and would render the said decision per incurium.
However, in view of the observations made by the court in paragraphs
21 & 22, it is clear that even in the said decision, the Court held that
the remedy under Section 14 of the Act would be available in
appropriate cases.

This decision therefore does not support the

submission of the respondent.
58.

On the contrary, decisions in Indira Rai & Anr V. Vatika

Plantations (P) Ltd & Ors., 127(2006) DLT 646 and Shyam
Telecom Ltd. V. Arm Ltd, 113(2004) DLT 778 of this Court and the
decision in State of Arunachal Pradesh V. Subhash Projects &
Marketing Ltd & Anr, 2007(1) ALR 564(Gau) (DB) are based on the
premise that Section 14 so permits judicial intervention.
59.

In State of Arunachal (supra) the Division Bench of

OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 38 of 55

Gauhati High Court have observed:
“31. The legislative concern manifested in Section
12 requiring a prospective arbitrator to disclose any
circumstance likely to give rise to justifiable doubts
as to his independence and impartiality is of utmost
significance. This coupled with the obligation of the
appointed arbitrator to make such disclosure even
during the arbitral proceedings proclaim the
unambiguous
legislative
disapproval
of
the
appointment or continuance of a person against
whom circumstances exist giving rise to justifiable
doubts as to his independence or impartiality. The
lawmakers, while casting the said duty and
permitting a challenge to the independence or
impartiality of an arbitrator, recognized neutrality
and fairness to be the hallmark of an arbitral
tribunal absence whereof, would vitiate the
proceedings striking at the validity, authenticity and
the bona fide thereof.

32. While there is a conceivable logic to permit
continuance of the arbitral proceedings following an
unsuccessful challenge to the arbitrator, there is no
apparent rationale to exclude the invocation of any
other provision of the Act for redress to a party in
default in a fact situation justifying the same. In
other words, if circumstances envisaged in Section
12(3) of the Act exist, a party failing to raise the
challenge based thereon under Section 13(2), in our
considered opinion, cannot be debarred from
availing a remedy otherwise available to him under
the Act. To put it differently, failure of such a party
to file an application under Section 13(2) on the
grounds under Section 12(3) of the Act would not
act as an estoppel against him. We are fortified in
our view by the fact that the grounds specified in
Section 34, only on which an arbitral award is
assailable, do not contemplate possible bias or
partiality of the arbitrator as a ground of
impeachment of the award. To shut out such a
party in the above premise from resorting to any
other legally permissible remedy would connote that
OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 39 of 55

the malaise of bias would not only remain
unresolved during the arbitration process but also
remain unimpugned at the post award stage as
well.”

60.

Section 14 of the Act has been interpreted by the Gauhati

High Court in the following words:“35. It is now time to turn to Section 14. Subsection(1) perceives an automatic termination of the
mandate of the arbitrator if he becomes de jure or
de facto unable to perform his functions or for other
reasons fails to act without undue delay and if he
withdraws from his office or the parties agree to the
termination of his mandate.
In the prescribed
eventualities as above, there is a statutory
termination of the arbitrator's mandate. If the facts
constituting the eventualities in sub-section(1) of
Section 14 are neither in dispute nor demand any
proof to be established, termination of the mandate
of the arbitrator takes place on statutory
prescription.
However, if one or more of the
circumstances enumerated hereinabove, requires to
be established, a party may unless otherwise agreed
to by the parties, apply to the court to decide on the
termination of the mandate.
Considering the
scheme of Chapter III of the Act dealing with the
composition of an arbitral tribunal and challenge to
the appointment and continuance of an arbitrator,
we are of the view that Section 14 has a role and
relevance independent of Section 13 of the Act. The
applicability thereof, therefore, is not contingent on
Section 13. The width and amplitude of Section 14
having regard to the precepts thereof are more
comprehensive.....”
61.

In Shyam Telecom (supra) a single Judge of this Court

considered the scope of Section 14 with reference to the words de jure
and de facto appearing in that section in the following words:-

OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 40 of 55

“12.............The
mandate
of
an
Arbitrator
automatically terminates at the death of the
Arbitrator or his physical incapacity to proceed with
the mandate. This provision sets following three
grounds that constitutes an Arbitrator's inability, (i)
his dejure or (ii) his de facto inability to perform his
functions or (iii) his failure to act without undue
delay for other reasons. The first situation refers to
an Arbitrator's legal incapacity to perform his
functions under the law and relates to circumstances
under which the Arbitrator by law is barred from
continuing in office, for instance, incapacity,
bankruptcy conviction for a criminal offence, etc.
The second incapacity relates to factual inability,
which includes factual situation, in which the
Arbitrator is physically unable to perform his
functions for instance, such as continuous ill-health,
etc. the last situation “failure to act without undue
delay” is an expiry provision according to which the
mandate of the Arbitrator shall terminate if for other
reasons he fails to act without undue delay.

13. The de jure impossibility referred to in Clause
(a) of Sub-section(1) of Section 14
is the
impossibility which occurs due to factor personal to
Arbitrator and de facto occurs due to factors beyond
the control of the Arbitrator.
The judicial
intervention of the Court is provided in Subsection(2) only if a controversy remains concerning
any of the grounds referred to in Clause(a) of Subsection(1) of Section 14 of the Act. Sub-section(2) of
Section 14 empowers the Court to decide the
question of termination of the mandate if a
controversy arises concerning the termination of the
Arbitrator's mandate on one or the other grounds.

14. .....The expression “de jure” means the `legal
right' or `authority' or `according to law'. The Blacks
Legal Dictionary defines “de jure” to be “existing by
right or according to law”. P. Ramanatha Aiyar's Law
Lexicon, Second Edition, 1997 defines “de jure” as
OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 41 of 55

“of right, legitimate; lawful; by right and just title”.

15. In the opinion of this Court, the expression”de
jure” is amply wide so as to cover a situation like the
case in hand. This view is based on the settled legal
position that Arbitration Agreement is the fountain
head of the Arbitrator's power and authority and the
parties as well as the Arbitrator are governed and
controlled by the terms of Arbitration Agreement.
Unless parties agree to the contrary, the terms of
Arbitration Agreement must operate in full. The
consequence of the Arbitrator not concluding the the
proceedings and rendering the award within the
period prescribed under the Arbitration Agreement
as in the present cases would uncloth the Arbitrator
of his legal authority to continue with the
proceedings unless the parties agree to extend the
period of making the award or a party waives his
right to such an objection. It must, therefore, be
held that expiry of the prescribed period for making
the award, would render the Arbitrator 'de jure'
unable to continue with the proceedings and has the
effect of termination of the mandate of the Arbitrator
within the meaning of Section 14 of the Act.”
62.

Gauhati High Court in State of Arunachal Pradesh

(supra) also considered the effect of the provisions of Section 13 on
the scope of Section 14 and observed:
“It is incomprehensible that in a given fact situation
exhibiting justifiable doubts about the independence
and impartiality of the arbitrator his mandate would
continue and the challenge to his authority would
have to wait till the completion of the process only
because the party aggrieved had failed to act in
terms of Section 13(2) within the period prescribed.
It is not unlikely that in such an eventuality,
irreversible consequences may follow, a situation
neither statutorily conceived nor countenanced.
Understandably, such a view cannot enjoy judicial
imprimatur as well. We, therefore, hold that a party
OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 42 of 55

who had either abstained from or omitted to raise a
challenge to the independence or impartiality of an
arbitrator under Section 13(2) of the Act would not
be debarred from invoking Section 14 contending
that the arbitrator had become de jure unable to
perform his functions.
Independence and
impartiality of an arbitrator being inseverable
attributes to vest him with the legal authority to
adjudicate the difference between the parties in an
arbitration exercise, he would be de jure disqualified
from discharging his functions once he renounces
the above qualities. This according to us is the
mandate of Sections 12, 13, 14 which form a
complete scheme with the underlying objective of
securing the sanctity and probity of an arbitration
proceeding.”

63.

However in para 35 of the judgment it was observed:
“35........ Two provisions are not mutually exclusive
so much so that a party not raising a challenge
under Section 13 of the Act would be excluded from
availing a remedy under Section 14 even if the
ground(s) urged is/are within the prescribed
parameters of the said provision.
To reiterate,
though a party unsuccessful in his challenge under
Section 13 would be debarred from carrying the
same to any other forum resting on some other
provision of the Act except to the extent permissible
under Section 34, such an impediment does not
stare at a party omitting and/or failing to question
the independence and impartiality of the arbitrator
under Section 13(2) within the time prescribed.

64.

While I find myself in broad agreement

with the view

expressed by the Gauhati High Court, I respectfully disagree with the
view that a party unsuccessful in his challenge under Section 13 would
be debarred from carrying the same to any other forum resting on
OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 43 of 55

some other provision of the Act except to the extent permissible under
Section 34, for the reasons already stated. In my view once Section
14 confers on the court the power to decided the controversy whether
or not the mandate of the arbitrator stands terminated, the said power
cannot be taken away by a decision of the Arbitrator under Section
13(2) of the Act which in no way is binding on the court.

Neither

Section 13(5) nor Section 14 of the Act imposes such limitation on the
scope of Section 14 of the Act, and it makes no difference to the
existence of the remedy under Section 14, whether the remedy under
Section 13 has been availed of or not.

The impact of the

interpretation given by the Gauhati High Court to the interplay
between Sections 13 and 14 would be that invariably the challenging
party would straightaway move a petition under Section 14 of the Act
and by-pass the challenge procedure under Section 13 of the Act
altogether.

Of the two remedies, the one before the challenged

Arbitrator under Section 13 would invariably be more expeditious
which would then remain unexplored. It could well be that when an
Arbitrator is challenged, his response to the challenge may satisfy the
concerns of the apprehensive party and he may not even feel the need
to invoke the jurisdiction of the Court under Section 14 of the Act.
However, the aforesaid interpretation given by the Gauhati High Court
to Section 13 of the Act would invariably nip such a possibility in the
bud and lead the challenging party to rush to the Court under Section

OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 44 of 55

14 in the first instance itself. In my view the aforesaid mechanism
would prolong, rather than curtail the delays in the culmination of the
arbitration proceedings.
65.

The decisions in Trishul Construction Co. (supra) is a

case where the Court rejected a petition for removal of the arbitrator
under Sections 11 and 12 of the Old Act on the facts of that case as
the plaintiff had failed to bring on record any material to enable
formation of a reasonable opinion of possible bias.

It has no

application to the facts of this case. Novel Granites Ltd.(supra) was
a case where same person was appointed as Arbitrator in more than
one cases pertaining to one of the parties.
hand.

That is not the case in

Therefore this case is also of no avail.

G. Vijayaraghavan

(supra) is a case where the Court held that mere existence of the
Arbitrator on the panel prepared by one of the parties was not enough
to give rise to bias. This case also has no application in the facts of the
present case.
66.

Reverting to the merits of the case before me what needs

to be determined is whether in the facts and circumstances of this case
there is a reasonable apprehension of bias to constitute de jure
inability to act as an arbitrator.
67.

The conduct of both the respondents is material here. I,

therefore, deem it essential to set out the relevant portions of the
communication exchange that took place between the parties and
OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 45 of 55

disclosures made from time to time. In response the petitioner's letter
dated 16.9.2003 respondent no. 2 wrote:
“Although the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996
does not provide for making any such declaration by
the Arbitrator, yet in order to dispel any doubts in
this regard, I hereby declare in the past I had no
relations with M/s. Oriental Structural Engineers Pvt.
Ltd. except for working as an Arbitrator/Member
Dispute Review Board in respect of some works
executed by them for various Govt. Department.”
68.

This reply suggested that the respondent no. 2 had in the

past acted as an Arbitrator/Member, Dispute Review Board in respect
of some works executed by the first respondent for Government
Departments.

However, there was no mention that respondent No.2

was also the Chairman of the Dispute Resolution Board Constituted in
respect of the principal contract. Respondent no.1 in its cryptic reply
states that :
“It is not at all a fact that we as Contractors have
done any work under Shri Prem Nath. He was, no
doubt, an officer of the National Airports Authority
but we have not done any work under him. Your
allegation that we have a deep rooted relationship
with Mr. Prem Nath is a fabrication of your
imagination.”
69.

Therefore, even respondent No.1 suppressed the aforesaid

relevant information. Thereafter on further probe, the respondent no.
2 in his letter dated 29.4.2005 informed the petitioner that :
“In the past five years, I have been appointed as one
of the Arbitrators in three Arbitral Tribunals, involving
Ms. Oriental Structural Engineers Pvt. Ltd., as
Contractor/ JV Partner. No awards have been passed
OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 46 of 55

yet by any of the three Arbitral Tribunals.”
Yet again, the aforesaid information was withheld by him.
70.

However, after the petition was filed, respondent no. 1 did

a complete volte' face and in its reply to the petition, for the first time,
came out with facts which to my mind ought to have been disclosed by
the respondent no. 2 when he was called upon to make a disclosure
under Section 12 of the Act.

Even the respondent no.1 had,

conveniently, at the relevant time chosen not to inform the petitioner
in his reply dated 23.9.2003 of the existence of facts which it has now
sought to place on record, with the allegation that the petitioner has
concealed these material facts. The respondent no.1 in para 6 of its
reply brought out the real relation between it and respondent no.2 as
follows:
“The respondent no.1 submits that respondent
no.2 has been appointed as arbitrator keeping in
mind the fact that the respondent no. 2 apart from
being experienced, is professionally qualified, and is
the Chairman of the Disputes Review Board for
the Contract Package IV-D. The Disputes Review
Board, as stated above, consists of 3 members, one
each appointed by respondent no.1 and the National
Highways Authority of India (NHAI) with chairman to
be chosen by the two members so appointed. The
Disputes Review Board is bestowed with the
function of conciliation between the contractor
and NHAI and makes recommendations. As
the Chairman of the Disputes Review Board,
the respondent no.2 is closely associated with
the Contract Package IV-D under which the
respondent no.1 issued the work order to the
petitioner. The claims raised by the petitioner and
respondent no.1 can only be adjudicated by a person
OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 47 of 55

who not only is aware of the complete project, but
also has sufficient knowledge and experience with
the type of work involved and interpretation of
contractual documents. It is further pertinent to
point out that all the Members of the Disputes
Review Board including respondent no.2 are
required to carry out at lease 3 site visits per
year so as to be aware of the projection
conditions and status of work. The respondent
no.1 submits that keeping the above facts in
mind, the respondent no.2 has been appointed
as the sole arbitrator. (emphasis added)”

71.

I am of the view that apart from the existence of the above

stated nexus between the arbitrator and the contract, the conduct of
both the respondents in not informing the petitioner of this fact in the
first instance itself raises sufficient and justifiable doubt as to the
independence and impartiality of the
arbitrator in this matter.

respondent no.2 to act as an

The fact that Respondent No.2 was the

Chairman of the Dispute Resolution Board in relation to the principal
contract was an extremely relevant fact, and none could have bona
fide entertained any doubt about its relevancy.

Having been the

Chairman of the said Board, Respondent No.2 must have been aware
of his association with the principal contract
acquired

by him in that capacity.

and the knowledge

In all fairness, he ought to have

disclosed it even without being so required.

However, respondent

No.2 kept this vital information close to his chest even when he was
required to make a complete disclosure.

OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 48 of 55

72.

Even otherwise the relationship of the Arbitrator (as the

Chairman of Dispute Review Body qua the contract granted to the
respondent no.1 by NHAI for which the petitioners are sub-contractors)
with the contract is such that in a dispute between respondent no.1
and NHAI, where the petitioner might not even be a party, the alleged
breach on part of the petitioner in the two sub contracts in question
may be attempted to be brought forth by the first respondent, and
same may in all likelihood influence the mind of the second
respondent.

The personal association/relation/knowledge of the

Arbitrator (the fact that three site visits have to be made by the
arbitrator and he is responsible to ensure cordial relations between the
Contractor and NHAI) with the cause of action is something which is
zealously guarded against in our jurisprudence and it is a settled
proposition that a judge should not decide a matter in which he is
personally

interested/or

has

personal

knowledge,

unless

the

responsibility is entrusted to him by the parties consciously after being
well aware of such circumstances.

These site visits made by the

Arbitrator before and after the abandonment of the work by petitioner
might already have introduced him to information pertaining to the
cause of dispute which might have already influenced his mind, even
before the dispute was referred to him or after it was so referred.
73.

In this regard, I may also refer to the provisions contained

in part III of the Act, which deal with the aspect of conciliation. A

OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 49 of 55

conciliator is to assist the parties in an independent and impartial
manner in their attempt to reach an amicable settlement of their
dispute. He is entitled to take into account the circumstances
surrounding the disputes. He can invite parties to meet him and
communicate with them orally or in writing. He may meet or
communicate with

the parties together, or with each of them

separately. The Conciliator holds a position of Trust, and is bound to
keep to himself confidential information that one or the other party
may provide to him in the course of conciliation proceedings. He is
bound to maintain confidentiality in respect of all matters relating to
the conciliation proceedings on account of the fact that the parties are
expected to confide in him and he acquires personal knowledge about
the parties and the subject matter of the dispute. Section 80 of the Act
prohibits

a

conciliator

from

acting

as

an

arbitrator

or

as

a

representative or counsel of a party in any arbitral or judicial
proceeding in respect of a dispute that is the subject of the conciliation
proceedings. The conciliator shall not be represented by the parties as
a witness in any arbitral or judicial proceedings.

This is, of course,

subject to the exception that where the parties mutually agree, the
conciliator may act as the arbitrator or as representative or counsel of
one of the parties in arbitral and judicial proceedings and may appear
as a witness in such proceedings. The aforesaid provisions throw light
on the nature of role of a conciliator in contradistinction with that of an

OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 50 of 55

arbitrator.

Before a conciliator, parties can, and normally would have

a heart to heart. Not so before an arbitrator. Therefore, the conciliator
may be privy to a lot more relevant

information than an arbitrator

who must decide the disputes only on the case presented before him.
Mustill and Boyd (supra), 2nd Edition at page 252, while dealing with
the aspect of interest and bias of an arbitrator makes the following
observations:
“More troublesome are the cases where the
arbitrator has nothing personally to win or lose,
but has already taken up a position in relation
to some or all of the issues which casts doubt
on his ability to assess them fairly. This can
happen where, in advance of the reference, the
arbitrator has already expressed himself on the
very matter which is in dispute. This is unusual.
Rather less so is the situation where the
arbitrator has decided the same issue of factor
law in the course of an arbitration between
different parties. Here, we suggest that there is
no necessary obstacle to the appointment of
the arbitrator: for he can be reminded that it is
his duty to approach the issue afresh in the
light of the evidence and arguments addressed
to him on each occasion.”
74.

From the aforesaid quotation, it is seen that the learned

Authors drew a distinction between a case where the arbitrator has
already expressed himself on the very issue which is in dispute,
though not in the capacity of an arbitrator and the other where he has
acted as an arbitrator and decided the same issue of fact or law in the
course of an arbitration between different parties. In the latter
situation, the learned authors felt that there is no necessary obstacle
OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 51 of 55

to the appointment of the arbitrator as he can be reminded that it is
his duty to approach the issue afresh in the light of evidence and
argument addressed to him on each occasion. However, in a case
where the arbitrator while earlier functioning as a conciliator has
acquired vital information and knowledge with regard to subject
matter of dispute or the parties and in that capacity has expressed
himself the situation would be different since the parties would have
lowered their shield before a conciliator who is obliged to maintain
confidentiality
confidentiality,

and

whose

proceedings

are

also

clothed

with

which would not be the case where the same

arbitrator had earlier functioned as an arbitrator.
75.

In my view both factors, viz. the non-disclosure in the very

first instance of relevant circumstances by respondent No.2 and the
subsequent disclosures made in instalments before and after the filing
of the present petitions, as well as the personal knowledge and
association of respondent No.2 with the principal contract give rise to
justifiable doubts about his independence and impartiality insofar as
the arbitration under the two contracts in question between the parties
herein are concerned. Consequently, respondent No.2 has become de
jure unable to perform his functions as an arbitrator, since his
independence and impartiality is in justifiable doubt. His mandate as
an Arbitrator accordingly stands terminated in both the Arbitrations in
question.

OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 52 of 55

76.

Reverting now to the second contention of the petitioner,

which pertains to OMP No.7/2006 only, that the arbitrator has failed to
act within a reasonable time and there has been undue delay and
therefore his mandate stands terminated, I find that the Arbitrator was
appointed on 25.8.2003 and he entered into reference on 27.8.2003.
Thereafter the petitioner sought the declaration under Section 12 from
him. The Arbitrator replied to the said letter on 23.9.2003. However,
no effort or progress was made so far as arbitration proceedings are
concerned until 21.1.2005 when the Arbitrator called upon the
petitioner to file its statement of claim.

This to my mind was an

unreasonable and lax approach on the part of the second respondent.
I see no force in the contention of the respondent that since the said
ground was not pleaded in the petition as originally filed and was
introduced by way of an amendment at a later stage, it needs to be
rejected.

When an amendment is allowed by the Court, unless the

claim introduced by the amendment is time barred, it relates back to
the date of the filing of the original petition and delayed introduction of
the claim by itself is not a ground for rejecting a claim which may
otherwise be tenable in law and in facts of the case.
77.

Because of the casual approach adopted by the arbitrator,

the very purpose of resolving disputes through arbitration failed to
yield any result expeditiously which is the object of the Act. Since the
arbitrator failed to act without under delay, his mandate stands

OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 53 of 55

terminated on this ground as well.
78.

As to the question of supplying a fresh Arbitrator to fill the

vacancy that has consequently arisen, Section 15(2) of the Act
provides that a substitute arbitrator is to be appointed according to the
rules that were applicable to the appointment of arbitrator being
replaced. The agreement provides for appointment of an Arbitrator by
the Managing Director of the first respondent. However, the aforesaid
conduct of the first respondent in concealing the real association
between them clearly reveals that it has failed to act bona fide. Merely
because one of the parties to an arbitration agreement may be
entrusted with the duty of nominating an Arbitrator, it does not mean
that the nominee can be a person who is in such a position in relation
to one or the other party, or is possessed of such knowledge or
attributes, as may give rise to justifiable doubts as to his independence
and impartiality. The obligation to nominate an Arbitrator is a solemn
fiduciary obligation to nominate an unbiased and fair Arbitrator. This
obligation cannot be turned into an opportunity by the party making
the nomination, to nominate an Arbitrator who acts with partiality in
favour of one or the other party. In the present case, the nominating
authority, in appointing the second respondent failed to discharge what
has been referred to in Interstate Constructions v. NPCC Limited
[Del] 2004(7) AD (Del) 499 as, his fiduciary duty towards the
adversaries.

In Interstate (supra) the learned single Judge of this

OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 54 of 55

Court was faced with a situation where the Appointing Authority as well
as the Arbitrator appointed by him acted unreasonably. The learned
judge held that the conduct and dealing of the Appointing Authority
compelled it to overlook strict procedural objections which are
calculated to defeat the ends of justice.

The learned single Judge

thereafter proceeded to appoint an Arbitrator after “overlooking” the
power of the Appointing Authority to appoint an Arbitrator.
79.

I find myself in agreement with the aforesaid view

expressed by the learned single Judge. Therefore, I appoint Mr. Justice
M. Jagannadha Rao (Retd.) Judge, Supreme Court of India as the Sole
Arbitrator in both the cases.

The learned Arbitrator shall be entitled to

fix his own fee and is requested to conclude the proceedings as
expeditiously as possible.
Petitions stand disposed of.

(VIPIN SANGHI)
JUDGE
December 28, 2007
P.K. BABBAR/as

OMP No.7/2006 & OMP No.29/2006

Page 55 of 55

