HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

Judgment reserved on : September 06, 2007
Judgment delivered on : October 29, 2007
W.P. (C) No. 5532/2007 & C.M. No.10716-19/2007
#
!

Mr. Sunil Bansal
Through:

..... Petitioner
Mr. Rakesh Tiku with Mr. Puneet
Agarwal & Mr. Israr Ahmed, Advocates
versus

$
^

Bharat Petroleum Corpn. Ltd. & Anr.....
Respondents
Through:
Mr. Rajiv Nayyar, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. A.D.N. Rao, Advocate for the
respondent no. 1.
Mr. N.K. Kaul, Sr. Advocate with Mr. S.
Prasad, Mr. Karan Mehta and
Mr.Siddharth Bambha, Advocates for
the applicants in CM Nos. 10716-18/07.
Ms. Zubeda Begum, Advocate for the
GNCT/respondent.

*CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K. SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

VIPIN SANGHI, J.
:
1.
The petitioner seeks a mandamus for consideration of his
price bids submitted in response to a tender invited by the respondent

W.P. (C) No. 5532/2007

Page 1 of 25

Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd., for the procurement of trucks for
transportation of LPG cylinders in Haryana/Delhi. The grievance of the
petitioner in a nutshell is that the respondents are proceeding to
accept the bids of those bidders who are offering trucks that are either
not even Bharat Stage I complaint or Bharat Stage I or stage II
compliant, manufactured prior to 1.4.2005, while refusing to entertain
the petitioner who is also offering Bharat Stage II compliant trucks
manufactured after 1.4.2005, only on the ground that the trucks
offered by the petitioner are not Euro Stage III/Bharat Stage III
compliant in respect of emission norms, even though the trucks offered
by the petitioner are relatively new, and are entitled to ply on roads in
the NCT of Delhi/NCR to pick up and set down goods within the NCT of
Delhi/NCR.
2.

The respondent no. 1 M/s Bharat Petroleum Ltd invited

tenders vide NIT bearing No.BPCL/LPG/PKD/NR/2007/03/Piyala dated
30.3.2007 from transport contractors for transportation of filled and
empty cylinder in trucks, to and from Pyala LPG bottling plant /staging
depot, Delhi to the destination as may be directed by Respondent No.
1 from time to time. The bid was to be made in two parts, viz.
Credential Bid and Price Bid (clause 2 of General Terms and Conditions
(GCT)). Though the exact number of trucks required was not indicated,
an approximate figure of 196 trucks was indicated in the tender
documents (clause 12 GCT). The work itself is divided into two parts,
namely, part A, pertaining to Haryana market and Part B pertaining to
W.P. (C) No. 5532/2007

Page 2 of 25

Delhi markets. The price bid in respect of Haryana markets and Delhi
markets were required to be submitted in different formats. The
bidders were free to offer trucks in either Part A, Haryana Markets or
Part B, Delhi markets or for both.

In this petition we are only

concerned with the Part B, Delhi markets, since the petitioner offered
all his trucks only for Delhi markets and the trucks offered by the
petitioner are having registration with the Delhi Transport Authority.
3.

For better understanding of the mechanics of the tender,

we set out below the tabulation in which the rates were to be quoted
by the bidders who offered their trucks for Part B, Delhi markets.
To

Delhi
Staging Delhi
Market Other
States
Depot (Rs. per (Rs. per cyl)
(Ps. per cyl per
Cyl)
km)

From
Ex-Pyala

N.A.

Ex. Staging
Depot
4.

N.A.

Therefore a bidder participating in the tender for Part B

Delhi markets could offer his trucks on the following sectors:
a)
b)

Pyala LPG bottling Plant to Delhi markets and return

c)

Staging Depot, Delhi to Delhi Markets and return.

d)
5.

Pyala LPG bottling Plant to Staging Depot, Delhi and
return;

Staging Depot, Delhi to other States and return.
Bids were to be evaluated on the rates quoted on sector

wise basis, and lowest quoted rate for a particular sector was to be
given preference for that sector. It was not essential for a bidder to

W.P. (C) No. 5532/2007

Page 3 of 25

quote rates for all the sectors, and the price bid of a tenderer was to be
considered only for the sector offered to be operated by him (Clause
37(1) r/w notes 1 & 2 in Standard Terms and Conditions (STC)).
6.

The clause 9 of the STC of the tender prescribed that the

trucks offered for Part A sectors or part B sectors must comply with the
following conditions respectively :
“9.3 Trucks must be covered with state
permit where BPCL's Bottling Plant exists.
a.

Part A (Haryana State)
1. Haryana State registration of
Truck.
2. Certificate of fitness
3. Haryana
Permit

State

Local

Goods

4. Insurances
5. Complying with Euro III Mass
Emission
Norms
(Trucks
manufactured
after
01.04.2005).
b.

Part B (Delhi State)
1. Delhi State Registration of Truck.
2. Certificate of fitness (with Speed
governor, where ever applicable)
3. Delhi State Local Goods Permit and
Haryana Road permit (as applicable
for Haryana).
4. Insurances
5. Complying
Emission

W.P. (C) No. 5532/2007

with Euro
norms

III

Mass
(Trucks
Page 4 of 25

manufactured after 01.04.2005).
7.

Bidders

were

also

required

to

submit

registration

certificate/certificate of fitness/route permits of their trucks/copy of
invoice or any supporting documents confirming compliance of Euro III
Mass Emission Norms for trucks manufactured after 1.4.2005 (clause
16(b) of STC) along with other documents. The selection criteria laid
down in clause 21 of the STC provided, inter alia, that “subject to
evaluation criteria, preference for award of job will be given as under:
1. Owned trucks over attached trucks.
2. Age of trucks i.e latest year, model will be given
preference.
3. Higher capacity Trucks (applicable for Part A)”
(emphasis supplied)
Petitioner's Submissions
8.
The petitioner along with his brothers claims to be in the
business of transportation.

The trucks of the petitioner have been

running under contract with various oil companies including the
respondent No.1.
9.

The petitioner and his brothers had submitted their bids

offering 135 trucks in the name of their firms viz., M/s. National Logistic
Company, M/s. National Bulk Carrier and M/s. National Transport
Company (hereinafter called the “three firms”).The credential bids of
the bidders, according to the petitioner, have already been opened and
the petitioner and his three firms are claimed to have been declared
successful pursuant to which earnest money was deposited. Physical

W.P. (C) No. 5532/2007

Page 5 of 25

verification of the trucks being offered is also stated to have been
carried out under clause 18 of the STC.
10.

The grievance of the petitioner is that even though the

trucks offered by him in the name of his three firms are those
manufactured after 1.4.2005 and are, therefore,

only two to three

years old, the three firms have not been called for participation in the
opening of the price bids, while bidders offering much older trucks,
which are not even Bharat Stage I complaint, or are Bharat Stage I or
Bharat Stage II complaint, and are manufactured before 1.4.2005,
have been called, on the ground that the trucks offered by the three
firms do not comply with Euro III/Bharat State III Mass Emission Norms.
This has been done by the respondents on the presumption that the
vehicles offered by petitioner cannot legally ply on the routes/sectors
in respect of which the aforesaid tender is called.
11.

The petitioner submits that it had sought clarification from

the Transport Department on the issue whether he could offer his
trucks to the respondent for the proposed operation

under the

aforesaid tender vide its letter dated 25.6.2007. The Transport
Department in its reply dated 6th of July 2007 informed the petitioner
that since the proposed operation was to be carried out between two
states, the conditions which apply to trucks which operate on local
permit, i.e. within the boundaries of Delhi would not govern the said
proposed operation. These conditions were not applicable to vehicles
having National Permits registered with the Transport Department of
W.P. (C) No. 5532/2007

Page 6 of 25

Delhi which were allowed to operate on the basis of the terms and
conditions of the said permit. Thus, the decision of the respondent in
not inviting the petitioner for consideration of the petitioner's price bid
is therefore, illegal and arbitrary.
Respondent's submissions
12.

The Respondent No. 1, BPCL as well as Government of NCT

of Delhi i.e., Respondent No. 2 have filed their respective counter
affidavits taking divergent stands on the claim of the Petitioner. The
Respondent No. 1 has relied on clause 9 of the “STC” and in particular
clauses 9.3 and 9.4 read as follows:-

13.

9.4 The age of the truck should not be more
than 12 years from the month of floating of the
tender as would appear from the original RC
book. The truck should also comply with
prevailing statutory requirements in the
area of operation. Those applying under
“Proposed Category” shall be governed by the
requirement as mentioned earlier.
(emphasis supplied)
Respondent no.1 submits that the Apex Court, in writ

petition(C)No.13029/1985, has issued directions from time to time to
the various authorities entrusted with administration and enforcement
of Motor Vehicles Act.
14.

Pursuant to such directions, the Ministry of Surface

Transport issued Notification no.GSR 686(E) dated 20.10.2004 by
which sub-rule (14) was inserted in Rule 115 of the Central Motor
Vehicles Rules.

W.P. (C) No. 5532/2007

This prescribes the Mass Emission Norms (Bharat

Page 7 of 25

Stage III) for four wheeled vehicles w.e.f. 1.4.2005 which came into
force a)

In the National Capital Region and the cities of

Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, Bangalore. Hyderabad including
Secundrabad, Ahmedabad, Pune, Surat, Kanpur and Agra in
respect of four wheeled vehicles manufactured on the from
1st April 2005, except in respect of four wheeled transport
vehicles plying on inter-State Permits or National Permits or
All India Tourist Permit within the jurisdiction of these cities
and
b)

In other areas of the country, from such date as

may be notified by the Central Government.
15.

The Respondent No. 1 has relied on the decision in W.P. (C)

No. 2882/2007 (a writ petiton filed by the petitoner in respect of the
same NIT) which takes note of the Supreme Court decision in W.P. (C)
No. 13029/1985 consequent to which the Ministry of Surface Transport
has issued the said

notification introducing certain restrictions on

registration and plying of vehicles that are Bharat Stage II or Stage I
compliant. The contention of Respondent No.1, based upon its
interpretation of a combined reading of the above materials is that any
commercial vehicle, manufactured after 1.4.2005, which is not Euro III
compliant cannot be registered either in the NCT of Delhi or in any
other place in the NCR or other cities mentioned in the notification
dated 20.10.2004. The stand of the Respondent No.1, therefore, is that
W.P. (C) No. 5532/2007

Page 8 of 25

any vehicle manufactured after 1.4.2005 which is only EURO II
compliant cannot ply within the NCT of Delhi or NCR, even though it
may be possessed of Inter-state or National Permit. The Respondent
No.1 has strenuously argued that vehicles with such specifications
cannot be permitted to ply locally, and if so permitted, it would be in
complete disregard to the directions of the Apex Court. Under the garb
of

holding

inter-state

or

National

permit,

transporters

circuitously be permitted to do what the law proscribes.

cannot
The

Respondent has also refuted the claim of the Petitioner that the
Petitioner's credential bid was accepted and the earnest money was
accepted from them thereafter. Rather, it is submitted that the EMD
had been submitted along with the bid and since the Petitioner did not
qualify the credential bid evaluation, they were not called upon to
participate in the opening of the price bid. Respondent No. 2 has, on
the other hand, presented its own interpretation of the notification
dated 16.9.2005 i.e. GSR 686 (E) issued by the Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways.
16.

According to the said Respondent, as on date, the emission

norms for registration of vehicles in Delhi are EURO II and EURO III.
These have been enforced since 1st April 2005 in respect of vehicles
manufactured on or after the said date. In case of goods vehicles the
norms for registration are EURO III (Bharat Stars III), irrespective of the
fuel on which they run, though a distinction has been made in the case
of vehicles plying on National Permit, All India Tourist Permit or Inter
W.P. (C) No. 5532/2007

Page 9 of 25

State permit.

Vehicles having any of the aforesaid permits are

registrable in the NCR even when they comply with Euro II emission
norms. Moreover, the pre 1.4.2005 manufactured goods vehicles have
been

permitted to continue running till

they

attain

maximum

prescribed age of 15 years from the date of initial registration. While
dealing with National permits respondent no.2 has

submitted in its

counter affidavit as under:
“National permits are granted under
Section 88(12) of the Motor Vehicles Act.
This requires an operator to opt for a minimum
of 4 states including home state. As such goods
carriages registered outside Delhi and plying on
national permit, which includes Delhi as one of
the 4 States, can ply within Delhi
irrespective of the norms applicable in
Delhi.” (emphasis supplied)
It further stated that:
“12. That therefore the national permit is
issued to encourage long distance Inter State
transportation of goods. However, a vehicle
having National permit can also operate
locally in the home state as per rule 90(7)
of Central Motor Vehicle rule 1989 which
is reproduced as under:
“the vehicle shall not pick up or set
down goods between two points
situated in the same state (other
than the home state)” (emphasis
supplied)
13. That the above position is also has been
clarified by the Ministry of Shipping, road
Transport & Highways, Government of India in
reply to the clarification sought under Right to
Information Act, 2005 vide No. RT-23018/2007T dated 20th June 2007.
W.P. (C) No. 5532/2007

Page 10 of 25

14. That as per the above provisions a
vehicle having National Permit can operate to
transport goods between states as authorised
and also can transport goods between
two points in the home state in which it
has been registered.” (emphasis supplied)
Submissions of Applicant in C.M. No. 10716 to 10718 of 2007
17.
The petition has also been opposed by M/s. Triveni Road
Carriers(P) Ltd and Anmol Transport Company, who claim to be
amongst those bidders whose credential bid has been found to be
acceptable.

They filed C.M.No.10718/07 for impleadment as party

respondents and C.M.No.10716/07 for recall of the order dated
31.7.2007, whereby this Court had directed that “Without prejudice to
the rights and contentions of the parties, the evaluation process of the
bids, including that of the bid of the petitioner, may go on.”
18.

It appears that the respondent no.1, instead of opening the

price bids of the petitioner's three firms has opted to await a decision
on merits in this case and has therefore not opened any of the price
bids so far. Since the petitioners had no objection to their being heard,
we have also allowed them to intervene and make their submissions in
opposition to the writ petition.
19.

It is contended by these applicants that the petitioner is

bound by the tender conditions and cannot seek to question them. It is
the prerogative of the tendering authority to prescribe the conditions
on which it invites bids. The petitioner cannot ask the court to rewrite
the tender conditions.
W.P. (C) No. 5532/2007

The petitioner has unsuccessfully challenged
Page 11 of 25

the tender conditions by filing W/P(C)No.2882/2007 and after being
unsuccessful,

is

again

making

a

second

attempt

by

raising

contradictory stands. It is also contended that merely because the
petitioner has obtained national/inter-state permits for its trucks, it
could not undertake transportation of goods from one point to another
within the NCT of Delhi/NCR. Learned senior counsel Mr. Neeraj Kaul
referred to a communication dated 18.12.2006 of the Respondent No.
2 herein, filed on record in W.P. (C) No. 2882/2007, wherein the
Respondent No. 2 has stated that the intention of issuing the
notification No. GSR 686(E) dated 20th October 2004 is to allow only
Bharat Stage III compliant four wheeled vehicles for plying within the
NCR of Delhi. This intention cannot be overridden by using the
technical route of National permit/Inter-State permit/All India Tourist
permit for plying four wheeled transport vehicles primarily within NCT
of Delhi, National Capital Region and occasionally outside the National
Capital Region. This communication also states that thrust of various
orders of the Supreme Court and the directions issued by it has been to
minimise the environmental pollution due to vehicular emissions. The
communication also stated that oil companies have been awarding
contract for transportation of LPG cylinders/oil supply for Delhi without
fully appreciating the import of the provisions which result in avoidable
action against such vehicles.
Discussion & Decision

W.P. (C) No. 5532/2007

Page 12 of 25

20.

The stand of the Respondent No. 1 has been that the bid of

the Petitioner's three firms were not processed for the reason that the
vehicles offered by them were not complying with Bharat Stage

III

norms, though manufactured after 1.4.2005. According to them such
vehicles

cannot be registered, much less ply on Delhi roads for

ferrying goods within the NCT of Delhi or the NCR.
21.

From a reading of the counter affidavit of Respondent No.

1, it appears that the requirement prescribed by it in the NIT to the
effect that the offered vehicles manufactured after 1.4.2005 have to
be Euro III compliant, is founded entirely upon the aforesaid
interpretation of the law as understood by Respondent No. 1 and, this
requirement, otherwise has no nexus with the object sought to be
achieved, which is to secure the services of contractors to transport
LPG filled/empty cylinders. Respondent No. 1, in para 10 of their
counter affidavit say that the order of the Supreme Court and the
notification “are binding on everybody including the answering
Respondent herein”. In para 18, Respondent No. 1 states that the
“tender conditions are in accordance and compliance of the” orders
passed by the Supreme Court and the provisions of the Motor Vehicles
Act and the Rules made thereunder.
22.

Consequently, if the interpretation given by Respondent

No.1 to the relevant rules and judicial orders is found to be incorrect,
and that of the petitioner and Respondent No. 2 is accepted, the entire
basis on which the said restriction has been put by Respondent No. 1
W.P. (C) No. 5532/2007

Page 13 of 25

would go, and the imposition of the said condition would be bad in law,
it being a result of either non-application of mind or a result of taking
extraneous materials into account.
23.

First we may notice the historical background of the

prescription of Euro/Bharat Stage norms from time to time. The
Supreme Court vide order dated 13.5.1999 reported as M.C. Mehta v.
UOI & Ors., (1999) 6 SCC 14 directed that with effect from 1.6.1999,
no vehicle shall be registered unless it conforms to Euro I/Bharat Stage
I norms. Vehicles conforming with these norms could be registered
without any restrictions between 1.6.1999 and 31.3.2000. But, with
effect from 1.4.2000, no vehicle could be registered unless it
conformed to Euro II/Bharat Stage II norms.
24.

Then came the aforesaid notification dated 20.10.2004,

GSR 686(E) prescribing Bharat Stage III norms. These rules, called the
Central Motor Vehicle (Fourth Amendment) Rules 2004 came into
force, inter-alia, in the NCR “in respect of four wheeled vehicles
manufactured on and from 1st April 2004, except in respect of four
wheeled transport vehicles plying on Interstate Permits or
National Permits or All India Permits within the jurisdiction of
these cities.” (Emphasis supplied)
25.

First thing to be noticed is that Bharat Stage III norms have

not been enforced all over the country. They have been enforced only
in the specifically mentioned cities. Secondly, Bharat Stage III norms
have not been made applicable to four wheeled transport vehicles,
W.P. (C) No. 5532/2007

Page 14 of 25

which ply on Inter-State or National or All India Tourist Permits within
the NCR.

Consequently, after 1.4.2004 a fourwheeled

transport

vehicle would normally not be registered by Respondent No.2 unless it
complies with Euro III/Bharat Stage III norms.

The exception to this

rule would be where the registrant applies for and obtains inter alia, a
National Perit or an Inter State Permit from the Appropriate Authority.
26.

Section 88(1) of the Motor Vehicle Act inter-alia, states that

a permit granted by a Regional Transport Authority of any region, shall
not be valid in any other State, unless it is countersigned by the State
Transport Authority of that other State. Section 88(12)

overrides

Section 88(1), inasmuch as, it authorizes the appropriate authority, for
the purpose of encouraging long distance inter-state road transport, to
grant National Permits in respect of goods carriages. “National Permit”
is defined in Section 88(14), Explanation (c) to mean “a permit granted
by the appropriate authority to goods carriage to operate throughout
the territory of India or in such contiguous States not being less than
four in number, including the State in which the permit is issued as
may be specified in such permit in accordance with the choice
indicated in the application.” The provisions of, inter-alia, section 79 of
the Motor Vehicle Act are, in so far as may be, applicable to or in
relation to the grant of National Permits. Section 79(2) of the Act
authorizes the Regional Transport Authority to grant a goods carriage
permit and may, subject to any rules that may be made under the Act,
attach the condition, inter-alia, that the vehicle shall be used only in a
W.P. (C) No. 5532/2007

Page 15 of 25

specified area or on a specified route or routes. Consequently, the
conditions that may be attached to a National Permit are those, which
are in consonance with the Rules framed under the Act. Rule 90(7) of
the Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989, as aforesaid, prescribes that
the vehicle (plying on a national permit) “shall not pick up or set down
goods between two points situated in the same State other than the
Home State.” This means that in the Home State, a vehicle operating
on a National Permits is permitted to pick up or set down goods
between two points. Pertinently, the words “other than the Home
State” were inserted by amendment in Rule 90(7) only on 28.10.1989.
27.

The expression “Home State’ in the context of Rule 90(7)

means the State in which the permit is issued. This is clear from the
definition of the expression “National Permit” read with the definition
of the expression “Home State” which is similarly defined in Rule 85
(which prescribes additional conditions of tourist permit) to mean “the
State which has granted the permit”.
28.

Once the Rules themselves allow a National Permit holder

to ply the concerned goods carriage to pick up and set down goods
between two points in the Home State, apart from undertaking interstate transportation of goods in the permitted States, it cannot be said
that a transporter like the petitioner
complaint

who owns Bharat Stage II

four wheeled transport vehicles registered in Delhi,

manufactured after 1.4.2005

would not be entitled to ply his

trucks/goods carriage even though he has obtained National Permits
W.P. (C) No. 5532/2007

Page 16 of 25

granted by the Appropriate Authority, i.e., the respondent No.2, to pick
up and set down the goods within the NCT of Delhi/NCR.
29.

We now proceed to deal with the decision of this court in

W.P. (C) No. 2512/2007 and 2882/2007. Both these petitions were
disposed of by common judgment on 10th May, 2007. In W.P. (C) No.
2512/2007, Vijender Kumar was the petitioner whereas in W.P. (C) No.
2882/2007, Sunil Bansal, who is the petitioner in the petition before us,
was the petitioner. The relief sought for in W.P. (C) No. 2882/2007,
reads as follows:
a) issue a writ in the nature of prohibition,
mandamus or any other appropriate writ,
orders or directions to the Respondent No.1
not to consider the tender of any contractor
whose vehicles are not confirming with the
existing law and in particular the motors
Vehicles Act and Central Motor Vehicles Rules
i.e. the vehicles should be either Bharat Stage
II or Bharat Stage III Compliant.
b) issue a writ in the nature of mandamus or
any
other
appropriate writ, orders or
directions thereby commanding the respondent
No.1 to strictly follow the Motor Vehicles Act
and Central Vehicles Rule and to consider only
those tenderers whose vehicles are confirming
with the law and are having Bharat Stage II and
III norms;
c) issue a writ in the nature of mandamus or
any other appropriate writ, orders or directions
thereby commanding the respondent No.1 to
clarify the tender conditions as per the Motor
Vehicles Act and Central Vehicles Rules and to
consider only those tenderers whose vehicles
are confirming with the law and are having
Bharat Stage II and III norms:

W.P. (C) No. 5532/2007

Page 17 of 25

30.

Therefore, the petitioner had in the said writ petition

sought adhearance to the Motor Vehicles Act and the Central Motor
Vehicles Rules, which according to his submission, permitted only
Bharat Stage II or Bharat Stage III norms compliant vehicles to ply in
the NCT of Delhi/NCR. Consequently, vehicles which were either Bharat
Stage I compliant or not so compliant at all were not, according to the
petitioner, permitted to register or ply within the NCT of Delhi or NCR.
31.

The said petition pertains to the NIT in question. The

finding of the court with regard to the effect of the judgment of the
Supreme Court in M.C. Mehta vs. Union of India in W.P. (C) No.
13029/1986 dated 28.7.1998 and the notification of Respondent No. 2
dated 20.10.2004, i.e., GSR No.686 (E) are recorded in para 10 of the
same which reads as follows:
“We have perused the notifications in question
as also the directions given in M.C. Mehta's
(Supra) case wherein the Supreme Court
realizing the urgency and importance of
protection
and
improvement
of
the
environment and to improve the quality of air
and reduce vehicular pollution had approved
the measures proposed by the committee and
the time frame there for. We notice that as per
the notification issued by the Ministry of
Shipping Road Transport and Highways
(Department of Road Transport and Highways),
Government of India dated 20.10.2004, only
vehicles manufactured after 1.4.2005, are
required to comply with Bharat Stage III norms.
Secondly, as per the directions issued by the
Supreme Court in M.C. Mehta (Supra),
commercial vehicles, which are over 15 years
old by 2nd October 1998, cannot ply on Delhi
roads. Taking into consideration the order
of the Supreme Court and the notification
W.P. (C) No. 5532/2007

Page 18 of 25

32.

dated 20.10.2004, we are of the view
that commercial vehicles having national
permit, inter-state or all-India tourist
permit and are within 15 years from their
date of registration, can ply on Delhi
roads. These commercial vehicles need
not comply with Bharat Stage II norms if
they are manufactured prior to 1.4.2005.
Once they are more than 15 years old
from their date of registration, they will
not be permitted to ply on Delhi roads
and, therefore, will be phased out in a
progressive manner. Further, commercial
vehicles, which sought to be registered
after 1.4.2005 in Delhi, have to conform
to Bharat Stage III norms. (Emphasis
supplied).
The view taken by the Division Bench is that the

commercial vehicles having National Permit were permitted to ply on
Delhi Roads within 15 years from the date of their registration. This
finding stems from the order of the Supreme Court dated 28.7.1998 as
aforesaid. This finding of the Court is not related to any cut off date. It
further goes on to say that commercial vehicles, which have National
Permit, State Permit or All India Tourists Permit and are less than 15
years old need not comply with Bharat Stage II norms, if they are
manufactured prior to 1.4.2005. In view of the aforesaid, the further
observation that the commercial vehicles that are sought to be
registered after 1.4.2005 in Delhi have to conform to Bharat Stage III
norms has to be understood as referring to those commercial vehicles,
which do not have either a National Permit or an Inter-State permit or
All India Tourist permit. Unless read as aforesaid, the statement
“Further, commercial vehicles, which sought to be registered after
W.P. (C) No. 5532/2007

Page 19 of 25

1.4.2005 in Delhi, have to confirm to Bharat Stage III norms” would not
be in consonance of the earlier observation in the same paragraph
which reads - “We are of the view that the commercial vehicles having
national permit, inter-state or all India tourist permit and are within 15
years from their date of registration, can ply on Delhi Roads”.
33.

We may also notice that in the aforesaid Writ Petitions the

court did not consider the aspect that the Central Motor Vehicles (4th
Amendment) Rules 2004, did not come into force “in respect of 4
wheeled transport vehicles plying on inter-state permit or national
permit or All India Tourist permit”. If the said amendment rules did not
come into force in respect of four wheeled transport vehicles plying on
inter-alia, Interstate Permit or National Permit, the obvious conclusion
would be that Bharat Stage III norms would not be mandatorily
applicable in respect of such four wheeled transport vehicles because
it is by virtue of the said amendment itself that Bharat Stage III norms
were introduced. It would, thus, follow that the pre-existing norms,
namely the Bharat Stage II norms, would continue to apply in respect
of

four wheeled transport vehicles, inter-alia, plying on national

permits. It is, therefore, wrong for the Respondent No. 1 to contend
that such four wheeled transport which are manufactured on or after
1.4.2005, plying on inter-alia, national permit cannot be registered
within the National Capital Region after 1.4.2005. Consequently,
vehicles which are registered in NCT of Delhi or the NCR are permitted
to pick up and set down goods between 2 points situated in the NCT of
W.P. (C) No. 5532/2007

Page 20 of 25

Delhi/NCR. Respondent No. 1 is therefore not correct in its impression
that the vehicles of the Petitioner which are Euro II/Bharat Stage II
compliant and are manufactured after 1.4.2005 and in respect of which
National/Inter-State permits have been issued are not permitted to pick
up or set down goods between the two points within Delhi.
34.

From a reading of the decision in the W.P. (C) No. 2512/07

& 2882/2007 and the affidavit filed by the Government and the
language used in the notification, it is clear that a vehicle complying
with Bharat Stage II norms, possessing a National or Interstate permit
may ply in NCR or Delhi, more so, when vehicles older and less
efficient and manufactured even prior to that date are permitted to ply
on the Delhi roads. This view is fortified by the language used in sub
rule(7) of Rule 90 of the Central Motor Vehicles Rules 1989 referred to
above.
35.

What the letter dated 18.12.2006 of the Assistant Director

(OPS) of Respondent No.2, which is relied upon by the interveners,
points out is a misuse of the National Permits/Inter-State Permits
obtained in respect of four wheeled transport vehicles manufactured
after 1.4.2004, which are Bharat Stage II compliant, by some
transporters by resorting to plying such four wheeled transport
vehicles within the Home State only, under the shelter of the National
Permit/Inter-State Permit. Such instances of misuse, even if one were
to assume to be taking place, are for the enforcement agencies to
detect and deal with appropriately. One cannot assume that all
W.P. (C) No. 5532/2007

Page 21 of 25

National Permit/Inter State Permit

holders would flout the spirit in

which the National Permits/Inter-State Permits are granted i.e. to
encourage long distance inter-State road transport, by restricting their
stage carriage operations to picking up and settling down goods within
the Home State only.
36.

Pertinently, the NIT in question itself shows that the work

involves transport of LPG gas filled and empty cylinders from Haryana
State to Delhi State and vice versa, and from Delhi State to other
states and vice versa, for Delhi Registration vehicles. One cannot
therefore assume that the goods carriage being offered to the
respondent No.1 under the NIT in question would be limited in its
operations to picking up and setting down

goods within the NCT of

Delhi/NCR, and on that basis exclude the Bharat Stage II compliant
goods carriage vehicles/trucks from consideration for grant of contract,
merely because they are registered after 1.4.2004.
37.

The interpretation sought to be given by respondent No.1

to the relevant Rules would also lead to absurd results, if implemented.
The result would be that while the respondent No. 1 would entertain
the bids in respect of goods carriage which are not even Bharat Stage I
compliant or are Bharat Stage I and II compliant and are manufactured
before 1.4.2005, it would not entertain bids in respect of goods
carriage which are relatively new and are manufactured after 1.4.2005
and are also Euro II/Bharat Stage II compliant. In this process, the
respondent would unwittingly do precisely what it has ostensibly set
W.P. (C) No. 5532/2007

Page 22 of 25

out to prevent, namely,

hiring an older and older technology goods

carriage, which are likely to be more polluting when compared to
goods carriage/trucks, which comply with Euro II/Bharat Stage II norms
and are relatively new. Pertinently, since the bidders are free to offer
trucks, which are upto 12 years old, trucks manufactured in the year
1995 and thereafter can be offered by the bidders. Therefore, it is
possible that the respondent might have received bids in respect of
trucks which are not even Euro I/Bharat Stage I compliant since the
requirement of complying with the Euro I/Bharat Stage I norms became
mandatory, w.e.f. 1.6.1999. This interpretation would also militate
again clause 21 of the STC which, inter-alia, provides that preference
for award of job will be given in respect of trucks, which are newer or
latest models.
38.

We could have appreciated, had the stand of respondent

No. 1 been that it would give preference to Euro III/Bharat Stage III
compliant trucks, since that would have provided an incentive to the
transporters to offer newer technology Euro III/Bharat Stage III
compliant trucks. However, since there is no legal impediment in the
plying of Euro II/Bharat Stage II compliant transport vehicle

with

National Permits/Inter-State Permits, which are also registered in NCT
of Delhi/NCR, within the NCT Delhi/NCR and in the States in respect of
which the National/Inter-State Permits is obtained, the respondent No.
1 could not have imposed the aforesaid condition by incorporating

W.P. (C) No. 5532/2007

Page 23 of 25

clause

9.3(b)(5)

and the

other

clauses

requiring furnishing of

documentary proof in respect thereof.
39.

We are also not impressed by the argument of the

intervener that it is for respondent No. 1 for lay down the tender
conditions, and it is not for the courts to interfere with the same.
Though that may be the position in most cases, the peculiarity that is
found in the present case is that the reason why respondent No. 1 has
imposed the condition, contained in clause 9.3(b)(5) of the STC and
other related conditions with regard to the production of other
documents and certificates, is that the respondent No. 1 admittedly
was reeling under the impression that only Euro III/Bharat Stage III
compliant four wheeled transport vehicles could be registered with
respondent No. 2 if they were manufactured after 1.4.2005, and that
only such vehicles could transport goods to and from Delhi or pick up
and set down goods within the NCT of Delhi/NCR. As we have found
earlier that even Euro II/Bharat Stage II four wheeled transport
vehicles, which have been granted inter-alia, National Permits/InterState Permits are entitled to transport goods to/from Delhi and also to
pick up and set down goods within NCT of Delhi/NCR, if registered in
Delhi, i.e. if Delhi is their Home State, the impression entertained by
respondent No. 1, which forms the basis of their decision to include the
said clause in the notice inviting tender, is erroneous. Consequently,
the said condition itself suffers from non-application of mind to the
relevant material and also from taking of extraneous material into
W.P. (C) No. 5532/2007

Page 24 of 25

consideration by respondent No. 1 while laying down the condition in
the NIT and is accordingly quashed.
40.

Consequently, we have no hesitation in holding that the

three firms of the petitioner who have offered four wheeled transport
vehicles manufactured on or after 1.4.2005, which are Euro II/Bharat
Stage II compliant, having National Permits/Inter-State Permits are
entitled to participate in the Tender process in question and cannot be
excluded from consideration by the Respondent No.1.
41.

Accordingly, we allow this petition and make the Rule

absolute. The parties are left to bear their respective costs.

VIPIN SANGHI
JUDGE

A.K.SIKRI
JUDGE
October

29, 2007

P.K. BABBAR

W.P. (C) No. 5532/2007

Page 25 of 25

