HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI
W.P(C) 5044 OF 2002
Judgment reserved on: November 01, 2007
Judgment delivered on: November 30, 2007
#
!

Ex.Const.Raj Kumar
Through:

..... Petitioner
Mr. Arun Bhardwaj, Advocate.

versus
$
^

Lt. Governor & Ors
Through:

..... Respondents
Mr.V. K. Tandon with Ms. Manpreet
Kaur, Advocates.

*CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

No
No

VIPIN SANGHI, J.
1.

The petitioner challenges the order dated 6.8.2001

passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Principal Bench, New
Delhi (for short `the Tribunal') in O.A No.2745/1999 whereby the
aforesaid OA filed by the petitioner has been dismissed by the
Tribunal.

WP(C)No.5044/2002

Page 1 of 7

2.

The petitioner was a Constable with the Delhi Police.

Admittedly he remained unauthorisedly absent for thirteen days from
13.6.1994 to 23.6.1994 and reported for duty only on 24.6.1994. He
was issued a memorandum for holding departmental enquiry against
him for unauthorisedly absenting himself for a period of thirteen days,
one hour and 20 minutes. It was further stated that “The previous
service record of Constable Raj Kumar No.1368/00 shows that he is a
habitual absentee and has absented himself on 20 different occasions
in the past. Numerous minor punishment awarded to him for these
absence have no effect on him.

3.

The above act on your past amounts to gross negligence

and carelessness in the discharge of official duty which renders you
liable to be dealt with departmentally under the provision of Delhi
Police (punishment & appeal) Rules 1980.”

4.

A departmental enquiry was held in respect of the

aforesaid charge, wherein the charge was held to have been proved.
The

Disciplinary

Authority,

thereafter

gave

the

petitioner

an

opportunity to represent against the enquiry report. After considering
the reply given by the petitioner, the Disciplinary Authority passed an
order of penalty on 11.10.1996 removing the petitioner from service
with immediate effect. The period of absence was to be treated as
leave without pay. It appears that the petitioner did not submit his
WP(C)No.5044/2002

Page 2 of 7

defence statement before the enquiry officer despite repeated
directions for a period of about two months. The petitioner belatedly
tried to submit his defence statement
along

with

the

departmental

which was eventually filed

appeal

before

the

Additional

Commissioner of Police. The departmental appeal and a further
revision met with the same fate vide orders dated 6.9.1997 and
8.3.1999. The petitioner then filed the aforesaid OA to challenge the
orders passed by the Disciplinary Authority, the Appellate Authority
and the Revisional Authority.

The Tribunal dismissed the original

application by its impugned order dated 6.8.2001 which is now
challenged before us.

5.

The first submission made by learned counsel for the

petitioner is that in the summary of allegations there were no details
of past absence because of which he was branded as a habitual
absentee who had absented himself on 20 different occasions in the
past. It is argued that without these details it was not possible for the
petitioner to have effectively met the charge of habitual absentism.

6.

The Tribunal has observed that even though it was open

to the petitioner to have denied, during the course

of the

departmental enquiry, any of the past acts of absentism on previous
20 occasions, the petitioner in fact had not denied the said charge at
all. Independent of the reason given by the Tribunal we find from the
WP(C)No.5044/2002

Page 3 of 7

enquiry report that during the course of enquiry, PW-4 had produced
the absentee record of the petitioner which was marked Exhibit PW4/A. The petitioner was also given an opportunity to cross examine
PW-4 which he did not avail of. Even in the representation made by
the petitioner against the findings of the enquiry officer, he did not
make any grievance about the fact that the details of the past twenty
acts of absentism were not given to him in the charge sheet and that
they were for the first time produced in the enquiry proceedings or
that he was not able to meet the said charge effectively.

7.

The real question to be examined is whether the

petitioner was, in any way, prejudiced due to the non-supply of the
details of past acts of absentism in the charge sheet itself when the
same were produced during the course of the enquiry. In our view it
cannot be said that the petitioner suffered any prejudice or that there
was a breach of the principles of natural justice and that he did not
have sufficient opportunity to meet the said charge. He was given an
opportunity to cross examine the witness, namely, PW-4 who
produced the record of past absentism pertaining to the petitioner but
he did not choose to cross examine the said witness.
witnesses produced by him in his defence did not

Even the

touch upon the

said aspect and it is seen from the record that his entire focus was on
trying to justify his latest act of absentism which had served as the

WP(C)No.5044/2002

Page 4 of 7

last straw before proceeding against him departmentally.

We

therefore reject this argument of the petitioner.

8.

It was next contended that the orders passed by the

Disciplinary Authority and the Appellate Authority were both a result
of non-application of mind, inasmuch as, while the order of the
Disciplinary Authority proceeds on the basis that the petitioner had
absented on 43 different occasions earlier, the Appellate Authority
proceeded to uphold the order of his removal on the basis that the
petitioner had absented on 31 different occasions.

The petitioner

argued that the allegation against him as contained in the charge
sheet was only in respect of 20 previous acts of absentism.

It is

submitted that the assumption of the Disciplinary and the Appellate
Authorities of a much larger number of absentisms has led to his
removal from service, which, but for such wrong assumptions may not
have resulted in his removal from service. The Tribunal has rejected
this argument and rightly so, by observing that the Revisonal
Authority had correctly noted the number of past absentisms as
twenty. It is well settled that absentism is considered as a serious
misconduct particularly in relation to a police force wherein discipline
is accorded very high priority. The reliance placed by the petitioner
on Delhi Administration V. Yasin Khan, 2000(86) DLT 144 is of no
avail to the petitioner, since in the facts of that case, the charge

WP(C)No.5044/2002

Page 5 of 7

against the delinquent did not include the charge of his past acts of
absentism, and no such record was produced even in the course of
the enquiry proceedings. It was in those circumstances that the Court
held that the past acts of asbentism could, therefore, not be relied
upon to punish the delinquent.

The facts in the present case are

materially different as noticed above.

9.

The petitioner then relied upon a certificate issued by the

RML hospital to show that he was suffering from back pain which was
stated to be the reason for his absence of over thirteen days between
13.6.1994 and 24.6.1994.

He also argued that the concerned

authorities had failed to deal with the defence of the petitioner.

10.

Learned counsel for the respondent submits that the

enquiry officer has considered the statements made by the defence
witnesses. He submits that DW-1, Shri Anil Kumar, who had deposed
that he informed about the petitioner's illness at P.S. Narela to the
Duty Officer, upon cross examination stated that he did not know the
name of the Duty Officer and that he and the petitioner had been
residing together for the last two to three years.

11.

A perusal of the enquiry report shows that the enquiry

officer has taken note of the statements made by the defence
witnesses. The Tribunal in its impugned order while dealing with the

WP(C)No.5044/2002

Page 6 of 7

said submission observed as follows:“13. It has next been contended that the
statements of the Dws were not discussed by
the E.O Applicant had furnished two Dws. A
perusal of the testimony reveals that neither
of them have repelled the charge against
applicant of abstaining from duty on ground
of illness, without the permission of the
competent authority. Hence this argument
does not assist the applicant.”

12.

While

it may be true that the petitioner was suffering

from back pain during the period that he remained absent on the last
occasion, that was no excuse for him to have absented without
permission.

13.

In view of the aforesaid, we find no merit in this petition.

The order passed by the Tribunal does not call for interference by us
in exercise of our powers of judicial review under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India. Dismissed.

VIPIN SANGHI
JUDGE

A.K.SIKRI
JUDGE
November

30, 2007

as

WP(C)No.5044/2002

Page 7 of 7

