*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI
Date of decision: August 30, 2007

+

W.P (C)No. 4641/1999

%

Sh. Subhash Chand Sharma
.....Petitioner
Through: Mr. Praveen Chaturvedi, Advocate.
versus
The Union of India & Ors.
..... Respondents
Through: Mr. A. K. Bhardwaj, Advocate.

CORAM:
HON”BLE MR.JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

A.K.SIKRI, J
*
1.
According to the averments made in this petition, the
petitioner was engaged as Enquiry Clerk (LDC) in the Central
Public Works Department of the Government of India w.e.f.
1.2.1984. He worked as Enquiry Clerk for a period of 6 years, i.e.,
till 2.12.1988 whereafter, he was transferred to some other

WPC 4641.99

Page 1 of 9

department and was asked to work as a Beldar. The petitioner
challenged this act of the respondent in shifting him as a Beldar
and treated it as a reduction in rank. He filed OA No. 2355/1988
before the Tribunal which was decided by orders dated 30th May,
1991 wherein, the respondent was, inter alia, directed to
reconsider the matter for being absorbed as a clerk in the CPWD
keeping in view the observations of the Supreme Court in the
case of Daily Rated Casual Labour Etc. Mazdoor Sangh vs.
Union of India & Ors. (1988) 1 SCC 122 and Dhirendra
Chamoli vs. State of U.P. (1986) 1 SCC 637.
2.

The matter was reconsidered by the department in

view of the aforesaid directions of the Tribunal and orders dated
18.9.1991 were passed rejecting the claim of the petitioner for
regularization as Enquiry Clerk (LDC).

In this office order, it is

mentioned that recruitment to the post of Enquiry Clerk (LDC) is
made only through the Staff Selection Commission. Petitioner is
having the educational qualifications of B.Com. and therefore he
could appear in the examination for the said post which is held by
Staff Selection Commission every year and an open opportunity
is provided to everybody. In spite of this, petitioner did not
appear in the examination and therefore he could not be
regularized as Enquiry Clerk (LDC).
WPC 4641.99

Page 2 of 9

3.

The petitioner, thereafter, almost for 7 years, did not

approach the Tribunal against the aforesaid orders. However, in
the

year

1998,

he

filed

OA

No.

655/1998

claiming

his

regularization as Enquiry Clerk once again on the premise that
the Tribunal in some other OA, decided in the year 1993, had
directed regularization of certain persons juniors to him as
Enquiry Clerk (LDC).

The said OA has been dismissed by the

learned Tribunal on the ground that the same is time barred as
the petitioner approached the Tribunal 7 years after orders dated
18.9.1991 were passed by the respondent.

Challenging this

order, present petition is filed.
4.

The submission of the learned counsel for the

petitioner

in

support

of

the

claim

of

the

petitioner

for

regularization as Enquiry Clerk (LDC) is two-fold, which is as
under:a)

Persons junior to him have been regularized

by virtue of orders dated 5.5.1993 passed by the
Tribunal in OA No. 712/1991. The petitioner is similarly
situated and is therefore entitled to regularization to
the said post.
b)

There are administrative instructions of the

department itself which stipulate that those muster roll
WPC 4641.99

Page 3 of 9

workers who have rendered 240 days service each in
two consecutive years in a higher category may be
regularized in the higher category even if they have
worked in the lower category for some time, subject to
the condition that the services rendered in the lower
category would not be considered for the purpose of
seniority.
5.

He

relies

upon

the

administrative

contained in circular dated 4.7.1988.

instructions

The petitioner further

claims that he is also entitled to be regularized in the higher
category, i.e., Enquiry Clerk (LDC) as he had rendered continuous
service for more than 6 years in that post and therefore fulfills
the condition for regularization as per the said circular.
6.

We may state at the outset that we are concerned

with the legality and the propriety of the impugned judgment
dated 3rd June, 1999 whereby, OA of the petitioner has been
dismissed as time barred.
7.

The learned Tribunal in the impugned judgment has

clearly opined that since the petitioner approached the Tribunal
after rejection of his representation in the year 1991, such an
application filed under Section 19 of the Central Administrative
Tribunal Act was time barred, inasmuch, as Section 21 (3) of the
WPC 4641.99

Page 4 of 9

Administrative Tribunal Act provides one year's limitation period
for challenging such orders.

The Tribunal in support of this

conclusion has relied upon two Supreme Court's judgments,
namely, Union of India vs. R.C. Sammanta JT 1993 (3) SC 418
and Secretary to Government of India vs. Sh. H. Gaikwad
(1995) Supp. (3) SCC 231.
8.

Learned counsel for the petitioner could not find out

any infirmity in the aforesaid view taken by the Tribunal and
therefore did not even address this aspect of the matter.

As

mentioned above, since we are sitting in judicial review of the
aforesaid judgment and did not find any infirmity therein that
factor alone is sufficient to dismiss this writ petition.
9.

That apart, we are of the opinion that even on merits

the petitioner has no case to seek regularization to the post of
Enquiry Clerk (LDC). It could not be disputed that the reasons
because of which representation of the petitioner was rejected
vide office order dated 18.9.1991 is that recruitment to the post
of Enquiry Clerk is made only through the Staff Selection
Commission and petitioner never appeared in the examination
held by the Staff Selection Commission for the said post. In what
capacity and how the petitioner was initially engaged as Enquiry
Clerk is not disclosed. Fact remains that he worked on adhoc or
WPC 4641.99

Page 5 of 9

casual basis as Enquiry Clerk without any selection process. Such
a person cannot claim any regularization and this aspect is now
conclusively determined by the Constitution Bench of Supreme
Court in the case of Secretary to State of Karnataka and
Ors. vs. Uma Devi and Ors. JT 2006 (4) SC 420.

The Apex

Court in the said case categorically held that the statutory rules
prescribing the manner for appointments have to be fulfilled. The
State/Government is supposed to follow those rules for making
appointments on regular basis which are framed under Article
309 of the Constitution of India.

We also note that earlier

judgments of the Supreme Court in Dhirendra Chamoli (supra)
and Daily Rated Casual Labour Etc. Mazdoor Sangh(supra)
were specifically taken note of by the Supreme Court and
disapproved. In fact one of the submissions raised by the learned
counsel for the State of Karnataka in the said case before the
Supreme Court was that various orders passed by the Courts
directing regularization were creating chaos as those orders were
without reference to legal principles and therefore the plea was
raised before the Supreme Court was to settle the law once and
for all so that in case the Court finds that such order for granting
regularisation should not be made, direction to this effect are
given by the Supreme Court. This aspect, on the basis of this
WPC 4641.99

Page 6 of 9

submission of learned counsel for the State of Karnataka, was
specifically addressed to by the Supreme Court and the plea was
accepted.

It is not necessary for us to refer to the detailed

discussion in the said judgment. What is important for us to note
is that the Court was clear in its opinion that High Court under
Article 226 and Supreme Court under Article 32 should not order
regularization of such causal workers. On the earlier orders made
by the Courts from time to time, following comments were made :
“45. While directing that appointments, temporary or
casual, be regularized or made permanent, courts are
swayed by the fact that the concerned person has
worked for some time and in some cases for a
considerable length of time. It is not as if the person
who accepts an engagement either temporary or
casual in nature, is not aware of the nature of his
employment. He accepts the employment with eyes
open. It may be true that he is not in a position to
bargain -- not at arms length -- since he might have
been searching for some employment so as to eke
out his livelihood and accepts whatever he gets. But
on that ground alone, it would not be appropriate to
jettison the Page 1946 constitutional scheme of
appointment and to take the view that a person who
has temporarily or casually got employed should be
directed to be continued permanently. By doing so, it
will be creating another mode of public appointment
which is not permissible. If the court were to void a
contractual employment of this nature on the ground
that the parties were not having equal bargaining
power, that too would not enable the court to grant
any relief to that employee. A total embargo on such
casual or temporary employment is not possible,
given the exigencies of administration and if imposed,
would only mean that some people who at least get
employment temporarily, contractually or casually,
would not be getting even that employment when
securing of such employment brings at least some
WPC 4641.99

Page 7 of 9

succor to them. After all, innumerable citizens of our
vast country are in search of employment and one is
not compelled to accept a casual or temporary
employment if one is not inclined to go in for such an
employment. It is in that context that one has to
proceed on the basis that the employment was
accepted fully knowing the nature of it and the
consequences flowing from it. In other words, even
while accepting the employment, the person
concerned knows the nature of his employment. It is
not an appointment to a post in the real sense of the
term. The claim acquired by him in the post in which
he is temporarily employed or the interest in that post
cannot be considered to be of such a magnitude as to
enable the giving up of the procedure established, for
making regular appointments to available posts in the
services of the State. The argument that since one
has been working for some time in the post, it will not
be just to discontinue him, even though he was aware
of the nature of the employment when he first took it
up, is not one that would enable the jettisoning of the
procedure established by law for public employment
and would have to fail when tested on the touchstone
of constitutionality and equality of opportunity
enshrined in Article 14 of the Constitution of India.”

10.

The Court also held in no uncertain terms that these

directions would be adhered to notwithstanding any such
administrative guidelines of the departments which run contrary
to the statutory rules framed under proviso of the Article 309 of
the Constitution.
11.

In view of the aforesaid authoritative pronouncement

of the Supreme Court, neither it is permissible for the petitioner
to take recourse to the earlier orders passed by the Tribunal nor
it can take shelter of the aforesaid administrative instructions to

WPC 4641.99

Page 8 of 9

stake claim for regularization.

We, therefore, do not find any

merit in this petition which is accordingly dismissed.

A.K.SIKRI, J.

August 30, 2007
aruna

WPC 4641.99

VIPIN SANGHI, J.

Page 9 of 9

