HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI
W.P(C) 19681 OF 2005
Judgment reserved on: September 21, 2007
Judgment delivered on: November 30,2007
#

Dr. Dinesh Kumar Paliwal
Through:

..... Petitioner
Mr. J. P. Sengh, Advocate

versus
$
^

Union of India & Anr.
Through:

..... Respondent
Ms. Meera Bhatia with
Ms. Pooja Aganpal, Advocates
for respondents no.1 & 2

*CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

No

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

No

VIPIN SANGHI, J.
1.

By this order, we propose to dispose of the above writ preferred

under Article 226 of the Constitution. The petitioner seeks quashing of
the judgment of the Central Administrative Tribunal(for short the CAT)
dated 8.12.2004 in O.A No.2695/03 and the order dated 8.4.2005
dismissing the review application filed by the petitioner being
R.A.No.90/05. A direction to the respondent to count the past service

wpc19681.05

page 1 of 11

of the petitioner rendered with KLP College, Rewari for all purposes
has also been sought. Brief facts of the case are as follows:-

2.

The petitioner was employed with Kishan Lal Public College (KLP

College), Rewari as a lecturer. After having served them for about 11
years, the petitioner joined Central Government Service on 12.11.1992
as a regular Assistant Educational Advisor(General) in the Ministry of
Human Resource Development.

The basic pay of the petitioner was

fixed at Rs.3,000/- per month being the minimum of the scale of
Rs.3000- 4500, though as a lecturer with KLP College, the petitioner
was drawing higher pay in the scale of pay of Rs.3,000-5,000/-.

On

14.12.1992, the petitioner made a request for the protection of his pay
claiming that the said college was an autonomous body of the
Government of Haryana since it received 95% grants from the said
government. On 10.5.1994 the petitioner's request was acceded to and
he was granted the benefit of pay protection. Thereafter on 27.4.1994
the petitioner requested the respondent to count his past service
rendered with the KLP College, Rewari for pension and other benefits.
However, by its communication dated 22.1.1996 the respondent
rejected the claim of the petitioner on the ground that the mobility
order 29.8.1984 of the DOP & T was not applicable to KLP college.
Consequently, the petitioner filed OA No.490/1996 before the CAT
against the said communication rejecting his claim to count his past
service rendered with KLP college. The said OA was disposed of vide
wpc19681.05

page 2 of 11

order dated 9.12.1999 with the direction to the respondent to consider
the case of the petitioner in the light of the observations made by the
Tribunal in the said order.

One of the observations made by the

Tribunal was to the effect that the KLP college was indeed receiving
grants exceeding more than 50% of the requirement of the college.
The effect of this observation would be dealt with later in this
judgment.

3.

The respondent challenged the said order of the Tribunal by filing

a writ petition before this Court, which came to be dismissed on
14.9.2001. Thereafter, upon reconsideration of the petitioner's claim,
the respondents once again rejected the request of the petitioner on
on 12.3.2003, on the ground that KLP college was not an autonomous
body. Relevant extract of the stand of the respondents as contained in
the communication dated 12.3.2003, reads as follows:-

“2. The matter has been re-examined in
detail in the Department pursuant to the two
personal hearings given to Dr. D.K. Paliwal and
the documents submitted by him.
3. The issue hinges on whether KLP College,
Rewari (Haryana) can be considered to be an
autonomous organisation as required under
government Rules for the counting of past
service rendered by Dr. Paliwal for pensionary
benefits under the central Government. The
following relevant facts clarified this issue:
(i) In order to be an autonomous body for the
purpose of counting of past service rendered
wpc19681.05

page 3 of 11

there for pensionary benefits under the
Central
Government,
the
concerned
institution must be a Society registered
under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 or
a body created by Statute or a Central
university having its own Governing Council.
KLP College, Rewari, is none of these.
(ii)Further, in continuation with (i) above, such
an autonomous organisation should have
provision in Memorandum of Association/Bylaws, etc. of its Governing Council for
complying with Government directives for
carrying out its business in achieving the
objectives for which the organisation is
established. KLP College, Rewari, is run by
the “Public Education Board, Rewari”, which
is a society registered under Socities
Registration Act, 1860.
There are no
provisions
in
the
Memorandum
of
Association of this society.
(iii)The authorities of KLP College, Rewari have
informed that their college is not an
autonomous body.
(iv)Government of Haryana has also informed
that KLP College, Rewari, is neither an
autonomous body nor can be treated as an
autonomous body.
4. In light of these views, the said KLP College,
Rewari (Haryana) cannot qualify as an
autonomous organisation for the purposes of
counting of past service of Dr.Paliwal for
pensionary benefits under the Central
Government.
5. As stated in para 3 above, counting of past
service of Dr.Dineshy Kumar Paliwal
rendered at KLP College, Rewari is
dependent on the
College being an
autonomous organisation as defined under
various rules of the Government. Neither
does the College qualify to be called an
autonomous organisation nor does the
wpc19681.05

page 4 of 11

college consider itself to be
organisation as stated by them.

such

an

6. Dr. Paliwal has been heard in person on the
subject on two occasions, i.e., on 22.1.2002
and 23.8.2002. On both occasions, no new
information was provided by him on the
basis of which the earlier decision of the
Department would merit a review.”
Dr. Dinesh Kumar Paliwal, Deputy
Education
Advisor
(General)
with
Department of Elementary Education and
Literacy, Ministry of Human Resource
development is hereby informed that his
requests for counting of past service
rendered by him at KLP College, Rewari for
the purpose of pensionary benefits not being
covered in the rules is not agreed to.
4.

To challenge the aforesaid communication of rejection of his

claim, the petitioner preferred OA No.2695/2003, which came to be
dismissed on 8.12.2004. A review application was also filed which was
also dismissed by the Tribunal on 8.4.2005.

Both these orders are

impugned in the instant writ petition.

5.

The main thrust of the petitioner's argument

is that while

disposing off the earlier OA No.490/ the Tribunal had held that the KLP
College received grants exceeding 50% of its expenditure. This was a
finding of fact returned by the Tribunal which was affirmed by the High
Court when it dismissed the writ petition filed by the respondent. This
finding thus, attained finality. This finding is in effect a finding that the
KLP college is in fact an autonomous body.

Once, a fact stood

established it became res judicata and it was not open for the Tribunal
wpc19681.05

page 5 of 11

to re-appreciate the issue and upset the finding arrived at in a prior
litigation inter partes.

6.

The respondent has not filed any counter affidavit but only

written submissions have been filed in support of their stand. First and
foremost it is contended that the petitioner had left the services of the
KLP College on 11.11.1992, yet he claimed the counting of his past
service only on 27.4.1994. As per the “mobility order” the option to
receive either the CPF benefit or to count the previous service as
qualifying service for purposes of computation of pension to be
received from the government, by foregoing the CPF, was to be
exercised

by the petitioner within one year from the date of

absorption. If an employee failed to so opt; it was to be deemed that
option had been exercised in favour of receiving CPF benefits. This
option once exercised was to be treated as final. The petitioner had
vide his letter dated 22.5.1995 informed the respondent that he has
withdrawn the terminal benefits from KLP college on 11.2.1995.
Therefore, he was not entitled to the grant of the benefit claimed by
him.

7.

On the question of applicability of doctrine of res judicata it is

submitted that the earlier order of the Tribunal in OA No.490/96 only
directed the respondent to consider the case of the petitioner afresh
since, in the opinion of the Tribunal, the petitioner, prima facie, had a

wpc19681.05

page 6 of 11

good case.

Thus, there was no adjudication on the status of KLP

College as an autonomous body, and therefore, the doctrine cannot be
invoked.

8.

We have gone through the judgment of the Tribunal in the earlier

OA no.490/1996. We find force in the contention of the respondent
that the Tribunal had not returned any finding on the status of the KLP
College as an autonomous body.

No doubt, the Tribunal concluded

that the said college receives grants exceeding 50% of its total
expenditure.

This categorical finding of fact cannot be disturbed by

the Tribunal in a subsequent proceeding. However, merely on account
of the KLP College receiving grants of exceeding 50% of their total
expenditure, it cannot be inferred that the Tribunal also gave a finding
to the effect that KLP College was an autonomous body. If that were
the case there was no point in the Tribunal directing the respondents
to consider the case of the petitioner afresh. The Tribunal would have
itself proceeded to grant the relief claimed by the petitioner, since the
only hurdle coming in the way of grant of relief to the petitioner was
the issue as to whether KLP College was an autonomous body or not.

9.

The “mobility policy” as contained in O.M dated 29.8.1984 read

with O.M dated 7.2.1986 provides:
“ .....that benefit of counting of past service will
be admissible in four cases of mobility, i.e.
mobility between (i) Central Government, (ii)
State Government, (iii) Central Autonomous
wpc19681.05

page 7 of 11

Body and (iv) State Autonomous Body. The
meaning of an Autonomous Body under the
Central Government has been defined in para
4 of the O.M dated 29.8.1984 (P-IX) and is
further elaborated in
the Department of
Pension and Pensioners Welfare O.M dated
31.3.1987. According to these orders:
A Central Autonomous body is generally a nonprofit making organisation which is financed
wholly or substantially from cess or Central
Government grants.
`Substantially' means
that more than 50 per cent of the expenditure
of the Autonomous body is met through cess
or Central Government grants. An Autonomous
body may be a society registered under the
Societies Registration Act, 1860 or a statutory
body or a Central University having its own
Governing Council whose memorandum of
association/by-laws etc., contain provision for
complying with Government directives for
carrying out its business in achieving the
objectives for which the organisation is
established.” The same analogy can be
reasonably extended for a State Autonomous
body.”
10.

From the aforesaid it would be seen that for a body to be an

autonomous body there are various conditions to be satisfied and the
condition that more than 50% of its expenditure is met through cess or
Central Government grants is only one of them. The others are that it
should be a society registered under the Societies Registration Act,
1860, or a statutory body or central university having its own
governing council and, most importantly for our purpose,

the

memorandum of association/bye-laws etc. should contain provision for
complying with Government directives for carrying out its business in
achieving the objectives for which the organisation is established.
wpc19681.05

page 8 of 11

11.

The finding of the Tribunal

in paragraph 11 of the impugned

judgment that the petitioner had not placed any document on record
to show that KLP College, Rewari is a registered society is not correct
in view of paragraph (ii) of the order of

rejection dated 12.3.2003

passed by the respondents. It is the respondent's own case that KLP
College is run by “Public Education Board, Rewari” which is a society
registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860. KLP College by
itself does not,

have any legal existence.

It is an institution

established and run by the said society. So far as the condition of the
body being a society registered under the Societies Registration Act,
1860 is concerned, the same, therefore, stood satisfied.

12.

On the issue regarding the extent of Governmental aid received

by KLP College, the Tribunal referred to communications received from
KLP College and the State of Haryana. The stand of the KLP College is
that they are

reimbursed 95% of the deficit of the expenditure on

salaries after deducting

the income accrued to the college through

fees etc. The State of Haryana does not consider KLP College to be an
autonomous body because the quantum of grant is not more than 50%
of the total expenditure. The Tribunal rightly notes that irrespective
of the stand taken by KLP College

and the State of Haryana,

the

matter would have to be examined in the light of the OM dated
31.3.1987 issued by Government of India, Department of Pension and
Pensioners Welfare.
wpc19681.05

The Tribunal than proceeds to record a finding
page 9 of 11

that the petitioner had not been able to establish that more than 50%
of the total expenditure is met through Government grants and, more
importantly, that the petitioner had not been able to place on record
any bye-law or clause in the

memorandum of association of KLP

College/Public Education Board, Rewar which stipulates that KLP
College is bound to comply with Government directives while carrying
on its business in achieving the objectives for which the organisation
is established.

13.

Even if it were to be assumed

recorded

on the strength of the finding

by the Tribunal in its earlier judgment passed in OA

No.490/1996, that more than 50% of the financial requirements of the
College are fulfilled by Government grants, the petitioner has still not
been able to establish that the respondent is an autonomous body
since the aforesaid ingredient necessary for qualifying a body as an
autonomous body has not been fulfilled by the petitioner in respect of
KLP College/Public Education Board, Rewari.

Even before us it is not

the petitioner's case that Public Education Board, Rewari and the
institution run by it namely KLP College satisfied the aforesaid
condition, and no document has been

produced before either the

Tribunal or before us to substantiate the fulfillment

of the said

requirement. Merely because at the time of fixing the petitioner's pay,
he was granted pay protection, one cannot assume that KLP College
was an autonomous body and that by itself would not entitled the
wpc19681.05

page 10 of 11

petitioner to claim the relief of counting his service with KLP College
for any purpose including for purpose of fixing his seniority or pension
at the time of his retirement from Government service.

14.

Consequently, we have no option

but to reject the present

petition as devoid of any merit. Dismissed.

VIPIN SANGHI
JUDGE

A.K.SIKRI
JUDGE
November 30, 2007
aj

wpc19681.05

page 11 of 11

