HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI
%

Date of Decision : August 30, 2007
W.P(C)No.1698/2003

#
!

University Grants Commission & Anr.
.....Petitioner
Through: Mr. Amitesh Kumar, Advocate
versus

$
^

Shri N.D. Gupta & Anr.
..... Respondent
Through: Mr. V.S.R. Krishna, Advocate
And
W.P(C) No. 1694/2003

#
!

University Grants Commission & Anr.
.....Petitioner
Through: Mr. Amitesh Kumar, Advocate
versus

$
^

Shri Pramod Kumar & Anr.
..... Respondent
Through: Mr. V.S.R. Krishna, Advocate
And
W.P(C)No.1688/2003

#
!

University Grants Commission & Anr.
.....Petitioner
Through: Mr. Amitesh Kumar, Advocate
versus

$
^

Shri Anil Kumar & Anr.
..... Respondent
Through: Mr. V.S.R. Krishna, Advocate

W.P(C)No.1688/2003, 1698/2003 and 1694/2003

Page 1 of 15

*CORAM:
HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported Yes
in the Digest?

A.K.SIKRI, J.
1.
to

The short question involved in this Writ Petition is as
whether

it

is

incumbent

upon

the

part

of

the

Petitioner/University Grant Commission to give a copy of the
inquiry report to the delinquent employee and thereby calling
for his explanation, before the Disciplinary Authority agrees
and concurs with the findings of the Inquiring Officer when the
Rules are silent in this behalf. This was the issue which arose in
all the three petitions before the learned Central Administrative
Tribunal, Principal Bench, New Delhi. The three Respondents
faced departmental proceedings wherein Inquiring Officers
held the charges to be proved. On the basis of the reports of
the Inquiring Officer, show cause notice was served upon the
Respondents, inter-alia, stating that Disciplinary Authorities
had agreed in the findings of the Inquiring Officers and the
W.P(C)No.1688/2003, 1698/2003 and 1694/2003

Page 2 of 15

Respondents were called upon to show cause as to why the
proposed punishments be not imposed upon them. For sake of
convenience we reproduce the said show cause notice in the
case of N.D. Gupta :
“Whereas Articles of charges were
issued/framed against you on the basis of
Statement of allegations duly served upon
you dated 23.08.1996.
Whereas your reply to the same was not
found satisfactory, as such Disciplinary
Inquiry was constituted against you and
Shri P.K. Sharma was appointed as
Inquiring Authority to inquire into the
charges/allegations.
Whereas the Inquiring Authority after
recording the evidence concluded the
enquiry
and
has
submitted
his
report/findings on allegations and charges
framed against you.
The copy of report of Inquiring Authority
dated 05.02.1999 is enclosed herewith.
Whereas I have considered the report of
the Inquiring Authority as well as the
record
of
the Enquiry
proceedings
alongwith all the relevant documents, and I
concur with the findings of Inquiring
Authority.
Now that in view of the fact that I agree
with the findings of Inquiring Authority who
has held you guilty of all the charges
levelled against you and keeping in view
the gravity of proved charges of
misconduct, I propose to impose on you
the punishment of dismissal from the
services of UGC.
W.P(C)No.1688/2003, 1698/2003 and 1694/2003

Page 3 of 15

You are hereby called upon to show cause
within 15 days of receipt of this letter, as
to why the proposed punishment should
not be imposed upon you.
In case you fail to show cause within the
above time granted, it shall be presumed
that you have nothing to submit against
the proposed punishment and we shall
proceed in the matter without any further
reference to you, which please be notice.
Sd/Disciplinary Authority

2.

Encl.: as above.”
After receipt of the replies which were sent by

Respondents to the respective show cause notice, they were
imposed the penalty of dismissal. Order dated 26.4.1999
passed in the case of N.D. Gupta reads as follows:
“This is in reference to the above
mentioned show cause notice vide which
you were called upon to submit your reply
as to why the proposed punishment of
dismissal from services of UGC maynot be
imposed upon you. A copy of inquiry report
was supplied to you alongwith the show
cause notice.
Whereas you filed a detailed reply dated
05.04.1999 to the show cause notice.
That I am seized of the facts of the case
and have also considered your reply dated
05.04.1999
against
the
proposed
punishment.
However, your reply in the show cause
notice is found unsatisfactory.
W.P(C)No.1688/2003, 1698/2003 and 1694/2003

Page 4 of 15

I, therefore, impose upon you the
punishment of your dismissal from the
services of the UGC with immedite effect.”
3.

It is clear from the aforesaid show cause notice and

the order passed, that the Disciplinary Authority did not give
the copy of the report to the delinquent employee before
agreeing with the findings of the Inquiring Officer, thus they
were not given any opportunity to make their submissions to
the findings arrived at by the Inquiring Officer. After the receipt
of the report, Disciplinary Authority had concurred with the
findings and had proposed the punishment of dismissal from
service, Show Cause Notice was limited to this proposed
punishment only. It is also manifest that after the receipt of the
reply, the said reply was considered only in the context of the
proposed punishment and was found to be unsatisfactory,
thereby leading to imposition of the punishment of dismissal.
This action on the part of the Petitioner herein is held to be
violative of principles of natural justice and Articles 14 and 16
of

the

Constitution

of

India

by

the

learned

Central

Administrative Tribunal vide its judgment dated 13.1.2003,
which is a common judgment in respect of all the three
employees. For arriving at this conclusion, the learned Tribunal
has referred to and relied upon the judgment of the Supreme
W.P(C)No.1688/2003, 1698/2003 and 1694/2003

Page 5 of 15

Court in the case of Managing Director, ECIL, Hyderabad
vs. B. Karunakar, (JT 1993 (6) SC 1). Following passage from
that judgment is also extracted, emphasizing the importance of
the supply of the inquiry report in the Disciplinary Proceedings:
“In the view that we have taken, viz., that
the right to make representation to the
Disciplinary Authority against the findings
recorded n the inquiry report is an integral
part of the opportunity of defence against
the charges and is a breach of principles of
natural justice to deny the said right, it is
only appropriate that the law laid down in
Mohd. Ramzan Khan's case (Supra) should
apply to employees in all establishments
whether Government or non- Government,
public or private. This will be the case
whether there are rules governing the
disciplinary proceedings or not and
whether they expressly prohibit the
furnishing of the copy of the report or are
silent on the subject. Whatever the nature
of punishment, further, whenever the rules
require an inquiry to be held, for inflicting
the punishment in question, the delinquent
employee should have the benefit of the
report of the Inquiry Officer before the
Disciplinary Authority records its findings
on the charges levelled against him.”
4.

The learned Tribunal has also relied upon another

judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of State of U.P.
Vs. Harendra Arora & Another, 2001 (6) SCC 392 wherein
Apex Court expressed the need for supply of inquiry report,
relating it with the prejudice which would be caused otherwise.
Thus, the ratio of this case is that incase the inquiry report is
W.P(C)No.1688/2003, 1698/2003 and 1694/2003

Page 6 of 15

not supplied before the decision is taken to concur with the
findings of the Inquiring Officer, it would result in prejudice in
the charge sheeted employee. On this basis, the action of the
petitioners was quashed.
5.

Submission of Learned counsel for the Petitioner

herein, which was raised before the Tribunal as well, to the
effect that there was no such requirement in the regulations of
the Petitioner framed in this behalf, was brushed aside by the
Tribunal holding that the judgment in Managing Director,
ECIL (Supra), categorically stipulates that requirement of
serving the show cause notice is mandatory, and therefore
notwithstanding those regulations, it was incumbent upon the
Disciplinary Authority to serve a copy of the inquiry report to
the delinquent employee and extract his response thereto and
thereafter only he could take the decision whether or not to
agree with the findings contained in the inquiry report.
6.

Learned counsel for the Petitioner submits that as

per Regulation 4 of The UGC Employees (Classification, Control
and Appeal) Regulations, 1967, the only requirement was to
serve a notice to show cause against the penalty proposed to
be imposed, and this was duly complied with. To buttress this
submission he referred to the Regulation 14(4) of the said
W.P(C)No.1688/2003, 1698/2003 and 1694/2003

Page 7 of 15

Regulations which is to the following effect:
“(4) (i)
if the Disciplinary Authority
having regard to its findings on all or any
of the articles of charge, is of the opinion
that any of the penalties specified in
clauses (v) to (ix) of regulation 10 should
be imposed on the employee, it shall (a) furnish to the employee a copy of the
report of the inquiry held by it and its
findings on each article of charge, or,
where the inquiry has been held by an
Inquiring Authority, appointed by it, a copy
of the report of such authority and a
statement of its findings on each article of
charge together with brief reasons for its
disagreement, if any, with the finding of
the Inquiring Authority;
(b) give the employee a notice stating
the penalty proposed to be imposed on
him and calling upon him to submit within
fifteen days of receipt of the notice or such
further time not exceeding fifteen days, as
may be allowed, such representation as he
may wish to make on the proposed penalty
on the basis of the evidence adduced
during the inquiry held under regulation
13.
(ii) the Disciplinary Authority shall consider
the representation, if any, made by the
employee in pursuance of the notice given
to him under clause (i) and determine what
penalty, if any, should be imposed on him
and make such order as it may deem fit.”
7.

He submits that as per clause (b) aforesaid, the

employee was to be given notice of the proposed punishment,
and the procedure as contained therein was duly complied
W.P(C)No.1688/2003, 1698/2003 and 1694/2003

Page 8 of 15

with. His further submission was that the Tribunal wrongly
relied upon the judgment in the case of M.D. ECIL (Supra) as
the statement of law laid down therein was in the context of
Civil Servants governed by Article 311 of the Constitution of
India. His submission was that the entire controversy, which
arose therein related to Article 311(2) 1st Proviso, as amended
by the 42nd amendment to the Constitution, and the Court
considered

the

question

as

to

whether

after

the

said

amendment, there was any necessity of serving the inquiry
report upon the delinquent.
8.

This

submission

of

Learned

counsel

for

the

Petitioner is ill founded. It would be clear from the very first
paragraph of the aforesaid judgment, that the Supreme Court
dealt with a group of matters, which were filed at the instance
of various parties namely, Union of India, Public Sector
Corporations, Public Sector Banks, State Governments and, so
much so, two private parties were also involved therein. In para
2 of the judgment, the court formulated the question which fell
for consideration and question No.(i) and (iv) are as under:
“i)
Whether the report should be
furnished to the employees even when the
statutory rules laying down the procedure
for holding the Disciplinary Inquiry are
silent on the subject or are against it?
W.P(C)No.1688/2003, 1698/2003 and 1694/2003

Page 9 of 15

iv)
Whether the law laid down in Mohd.
Ramjan Khan Case, 1991 (1) SCC 588 will
apply to all establishments Government or
non-government, public and private sector
Undertakings?”
9.

The Supreme Court thereafter indulged into thread

bare discussion of all the aforesaid questions not only with
reference to Article 311, but on the touch stone of principles of
natural justice and opined that where the inquiry officer is
other

than

the

disciplinary

authority,

the

disciplinary

proceedings break into two stages. The first stage ends when
the disciplinary authority arrives at its conclusions on the basis
of the evidence, enquiry officer's report and the delinquent
employee's reply to it. The second stage begins when the
disciplinary authority decides to impose penalty on the basis of
its conclusion. It further held that the right to represent against
the findings in the report is part of the reasonable opportunity
available during the first stage of the inquiry viz., before the
disciplinary authority takes into consideration the findings in
the report. It further held that the service rules/standing orders
which deny the report to the employee are against the
principles of natural justice and, therefore, invalid. The
delinquent employee will, therefore, be entitled to a copy of
the report even if the statutory rules do not permit the
W.P(C)No.1688/2003, 1698/2003 and 1694/2003

Page 10 of 15

furnishing of the report or are silent on the subject. It was also
held that it would not be appropriate to construe the failure of
the employee to ask for the report as waiver of his rights by
him where the employee asks for the report or not, the report
has to be furnished to him.
It may not be necessary to discuss the law laid down in M.D.,
ECIL (supra) in detail, and our purpose would be served by
reproducing the summation of legal principal contained in para
29 of the said judgment, as under:

10.

“Hence it has to be held that when the
enquiry officer is not the disciplinary
authority, the delinquent employee has a
right to receive a copy of the enquiry
officer's report before the disciplinary
authority arrives at its conclusion with
regard to the guilt or innocence of the
employee with regard to the charges
levelled against him. That right is a part of
the employee's right to defend himself
against the charges levelled against him.
A denial of the enquiry officer's report
before the disciplinary authority takes its
decision on the charges, is a denial of
reasonable opportunity to the employee to
prove his innocence and is a breach of the
principles of natural justice.”
The Supreme Court also made it abundantly clear

that this rule shall be applicable to not only Government
employee but the employees of Public Sector Undertakings as
well as the Private Sector Undertakings.
11.

In the present cases the Inquiring Officers were

W.P(C)No.1688/2003, 1698/2003 and 1694/2003

Page 11 of 15

different from the disciplinary authority in all the three cases.
The Rules are silent with regard to supply of inquiry report
before taking decision by the Disciplinary Authority whether to
agree with the findings of the Inquiring Officer as recorded in
the inquiry report or not. As per the mandate of the aforesaid
decision, a copy of the inquiry report has to be furnished even
if Rules are silent, and non furnishing of the copy of the inquiry
report is treated as breach of the principles of natural justice,
and in turn amounts to infraction of Article 14 of the
Constitution of India, as principles of natural justice are read
into Article 14.
12.
distinction

Learned counsel for the Petitioner sought to draw a
between the case of UGC and the judgment in

M.D., ECIL (Supra) on the ground that employees of the UGC
are not Civil Servant and therefore not governed by Article 311
of the Constitution of India. For this proposition he relied upon
the following two decisions of Supreme Court;
“i)

Dr.

(Mrs.)

Gurjeewan

Garewal

v.

Dr.

(Mrs.) Sumitra Dash & Ors. JT 2004 (Suppl.1) SC 140
ii)

R.

Vishwanathan

Pillai

vs.

State

of

Kerala, (2004) 2 SCC 105.”
13.

In the first case, which related to the officials of the

W.P(C)No.1688/2003, 1698/2003 and 1694/2003

Page 12 of 15

Post

Graduate

Institute

of

Medical

Education

Research(PGIMER), the court held that its employees would not
be the holders of Civil posts and therefore, cannot claim
recourse to Article 311 of the constitution. There is no quarrel
with this proposition of law. However, what the counsel for the
Petitioner forgets is that the High Court in that case held the
removal to be bad on the ground that no opportunity was given
to the concerned employee, which according to the High Court,
was in violation of Article 311. Thus, the mistake and error,
which was committed by the High Court was to hold the
termination of an employee of PGIMER as violative of Article
311 and thus bad in law, and in this background, the question
that arose for consideration was as to whether the officials of
PGIMER would be holders of Civil posts and Civil Service under
Article 311 of Constitution of India. As pointed out above, in the
present case the decision is not predicated on Article 311 but is
founded on infraction of the principles of natural justice and
Article 14 of the Constitution of India. Since UGS, which is a
statutory body, is a State and other authority under Article 12
of the Constitution of India, its employees would have
protection of Article 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India. In
any case, the principle laid down in M.D., ECIL (Supra), as
W.P(C)No.1688/2003, 1698/2003 and 1694/2003

Page 13 of 15

pointed out above, is applicable even to employees of Private
Sector Undertakings.
14.

In R. Vishwanatha Pillai (Supra) as well, the

question which fell for consideration is totally foreign to the
present case and has no relevancy at all. In that case, the
appellant had procured appointment in a post meant for a
reserved category candidate on the basis of a false caste
certificate. This appointment was secured with State of Kerala.
The officials of State of Kerala would be Public Servants within
the meaning of Article 311 and this is not in dispute. However,
the question which fall for consideration was as to whether a
person who has procured his appointment on the basis of a
false caste certificate would be treated as holding a civil post
within the meaning of Article 311. The court answered this in
negative and on this premise it was held that such a person
shall not be having protection of Article 311 and his services
could be terminated without recourse to Article 311 as the
appointment itself was procured on the basis of false
documents.
15.

In these circumstances, we have no hesitation in

holding that the present petition preferred by the Petitioner
impugning

the

judgment

of

W.P(C)No.1688/2003, 1698/2003 and 1694/2003

the

Tribunal,

is

totally

Page 14 of 15

misconceived.

The

Tribunal

has

rightly

held

that

the

punishment of dismissal imposed upon the employees was
violative of principles of natural justice applying the ratio of
M.D., ECIL (Supra) and Harinder Arora (Supra). We may
note that while setting aside the impugned penalty order, the
Tribunal gave liberty to the Disciplinary Authority to continue
with the proceedings further after endorsing a copy of the
inquiry report and calling upon the Respondent to show cause,
before taking a decision. Instead of doing so, the Petitioner
rushed to this court, challenging the said decision. We
therefore, dismiss this petition. However, in the facts of this
case we leave the parties to bear their respective costs.
A.K.SIKRI, J.

August 30, 2007

VIPIN SANGHI, J.

P.K. BABBAR

W.P(C)No.1688/2003, 1698/2003 and 1694/2003

Page 15 of 15

