*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI
Date of decision:

+
%

31st August 2007

W.P. (C) No.6376/2007
Union of India &Ors.
Through:

.....Petitioner
Mr. Rajiv Dutta, Sr. Advocate
with Mr. Kumar Rajesh Singh,
Advocate.

versus
S.P. Gupta

..... Respondent
Through: Ms. Meenu Mainee, Advocate

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K.SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?

No

2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

No

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

No

VIPIN SANGHI, J (Oral)
*
1.

This petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India

has been filed by the Union of India to challenge the order dated 29th
May 2007 passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Principal
Bench, New Delhi, hereinafter referred to as 'the tribunal' whereby
the

Tribunal

WP(C) No.6376/2007

has

allowed

the

Original

Application

bearing

Page 1 of 10

No.1571/2005 filed by the respond to challenge the orders of penalty
passed by the disciplinary authority, the appellate authority and the
revisional authority, which eventually resulted in his compulsory
retirement from service.
2.

The respondent was appointed as a ticket collector in the

1965 with the railways and since 1984 he was working in the
promoted post as head TTE. A memorandum dated 23rd of January
1995 was issued to the respondent proposing to hold an enquiry
against him under rule 9 of the Railway Servants (Discipline and
Appeal) Rules, 1968.

The gravamen of the charge against the

respondent was that on 21st May 1994, while he was posted and
working as TTE and manning the 2 tire AC coach of 3009UP, he was
detected to have committed irregularities. It was stated that during
the vigilance check one passenger, by the name of Dr P. Singh who
was traveling from Bareilly to Dehradun was found to be occupying
berth number 41 in the second AC coach.

The charge against the

respondent was that he had allowed the said passenger to travel in
second AC coach without duly regularising the allotment of the said
berth to him for, obviously, some consideration.
3.

An enquiry was held by the enquiry officer into the

charges who held that all the charges against the respondent stood
proved.

The enquiry report was accepted by the disciplinary

authority and an order imposing penalty of removal from service was
WP(C) No.6376/2007

Page 2 of 10

passed against the respondent on 28th May 1996.

He preferred an

appeal which was also rejected on 3rd September 1996.

In the

revision application preferred by the respondent, the divisional
Railway Manager reduced the penalty to compulsory retirement by
his order dated the 19th December 1996. That order was subjected to
challenge in OA No. 81/1999. The tribunal allowed the said OA on 5 th
November 2000, on the ground that the penalty order had not been
passed by the competent authority.
4.

Consequently, the Senior Divisional Commercial Manager,

i.e., the Competent Disciplinary Authority passed an order of penalty
of removal from service against the respondent vide his order dated
28th December 2001 after giving an opportunity to the respondent to
make his representation.

The Appellate Authority reduced the

penalty to compulsory retirement on the 23rd May, 2002. The
respondent thereupon preferred a revision application.

Since his

revision application was not being decided, the respondent again
approached the tribunal by filing OA No.220/2004. It was disposed of
with a direction to the revisional authority to decide the revision
application. The revisional authority dismissed the revision filed by
the respondent on 10th March 2005. Thereupon the respondent again
approached the tribunal by filing OA No. 1571/2005 wherein the
impugned order has been passed.
5.

The tribunal while allowing the aforesaid OA concluded

WP(C) No.6376/2007

Page 3 of 10

that the present was a case where there had been a complete
negation of the principles of natural justice, and that there was no
evidence to support the charges levelled against the respond.
6.

The submission of the petitioner before us is that the

petitioner had conducted a regular enquiry strictly in accordance with
the rules and there was no procedural infirmity in the holding of the
enquiry where under the respondent was found guilty of having
committed

misconduct.

The

Enquiry

Officer,

the

Disciplinary

Authority, the Appellate Authority and the Revisional Authority had all
considered the materials and evidence produced before the Enquiry
Officer while arriving at their finding of guilt and punishing the
respondent. By placing reliance upon the decision of the Hon’ble
Supreme Court in Apparel Export Promotion Council versus A.
K. Chopra JT 1999(1) SC 61, the petitioner contended that the
Disciplinary Authority is the sole judge of facts and in case an appeal
is preferred, the appellate authority has also the power and
jurisdiction to appreciate the evidence.

The High Court in writ

jurisdiction may not normally interfere with those factual findings.
The exception to this general rule is where the courts find that the
recorded findings were based on “no evidence”, or that the findings
were wholly perverse, or legally untenable.

The adequacy or

inadequacy of evidence cannot be canvassed before the court since
the court does not sit as an appellate authority over the factual

WP(C) No.6376/2007

Page 4 of 10

findings

recorded

during

the

departmental

proceedings.

While

exercising its powers of judicial review the court cannot normally
substitute its own conclusion with regard to the guilt of the delinquent
for that of the departmental authorities.
7.

The submission of the Counsel for the petitioner, with

regard to the legal position in respect of the scope of judicial review
of the disciplinary proceedings is correct, and there can be no quarrel
with the same.

The court would normally not interfere with the

findings of the disciplinary authority in a departmental enquiry
unless the same are based on no evidence, or are in violation of the
principles of Natural Justice, or are perverse or are otherwise, illegally
untenable. Therefore, what has to be seen is, whether in the facts of
the present case the tribunal correctly interfered with the disciplinary
proceedings on the ground that there was violation of the principles of
natural justice and that this was a case of “no evidence” to fix the
guilt of the respondent.
8.

Having gone through the order of the tribunal as well as

the enquiry report wherein the evidence produced before the enquiry
officer is also discussed, we are of the view that the tribunal has in
the facts of this case correctly come to the conclusion that there was
violation of the principles of natural justice and that the present is a
case where there was no evidence to fix the guilt of the respondent.
9.

The case of the petitioner was that -

WP(C) No.6376/2007

Page 5 of 10

(i) upon the vigilance check it was found that Dr P. Singh
was occupying berth number 41 of the AC coach under
the charge of the respondent on the date of the
incident.
(ii)Dr. Singh had disclosed to the Vigilance Team that he
had purchased a ticket but wished that his status be
upgraded for facilitating his travel in the AC coach.
(iii)For this, he had entrusted the ticket and also the
required amount to the coach attendant for upgrading
his ticket.
(iv)At the time of interrogation Dr Singh had no ticket with
him.
(v)The respondent had stated that he was not aware as to
how Dr Singh had come to occupy the seat.
(vi)The coach attendant also admitted that Dr. Singh had
given him the money and the ticket and that another
conductor had prepared the extra fare ticket but that it
was yet to be handed over to Dr Singh.
(vii)These statements were made by the coach attendant
in the presence of
However,

Dr Singh and the respondent.

after the respondent departed from the

scene, the coach attendant changed his version by
stating that the amount had been given by him to the

WP(C) No.6376/2007

Page 6 of 10

respondent.
(viii)The Respondent refused to issue a fresh ticket to Dr.
Singh despite being asked to do so, on the ground that
he had not received the extra fare and the old ticket of
Dr. Singh.
10.

Pertinently, the coach attendant whose statement was so

heavily relied upon by the petitioner in the enquiry, and by the
enquiry officer and the other authorities to fix the guilt of the
respondent, was not even produced in the course of the enquiry.
Merely because he subsequently and behind the back of the
respondent stated that he had handed over the additional fare to the
respondent, the respondent was found guilty of having accepted the
extra fare and yet not issued a receipt for the same, or a fresh ticket
to Dr Singh. It is also pertinent to note that in the presence of Dr
Singh and the coach attendant when the respondent was asked to
issue an extra fare ticket, he refused to comply with the said direction
of the vigilance team. Therefore, the respondent from the beginning
boldly took the stand that he had not received either the lower class
ticket or the money for issuance of a fresh higher class ticket. At that
time, the coach attendant never stated or confronted the respondent
that he had handed over the lower class ticket and the extra fare to
the respondent. This conduct of the respond was, in itself, treated as
a misconduct on the assumption that he had in fact received the

WP(C) No.6376/2007

Page 7 of 10

lower class ticket along with the additional fare from the coach
attendant. Equally important is the fact that another TTE had issued
an extra fare ticket, whom the coach attendant had approached for
the said purpose. This receipt for the extra fare was duly proved in
the enquiry proceedings and the same had been prepared in the
normal course of business. There was no suspicious circumstance at
all forthcoming to doubt the authenticity of the said document. The
said ticket examiner was produced as a defense witness in the
enquiry proceedings who stated that he had issued the extra fare
ticket when he was approached by the coach attendant for the said
purpose. It was also established that the said ticket examiner was
authorized to issue the extra fare ticket and that he was also on duty
in the same train.
11.

In the face of the aforesaid evidence produced in the

enquiry, and in the absence of any other material whatsoever to
establish the guilt of the respondent, we are of the view that the
tribunal was completely justified in concluding that, firstly, there had
been violation of the principles of natural justice, inasmuch as, the
statement of the coach attendant had been relied upon by the
petitioner without producing him as a witness in the course of the
enquiry and without providing an opportunity to the respondent to
cross-examine him, and secondly the petitioner's had completely
ignored the material brought on record by the respondent to

WP(C) No.6376/2007

Page 8 of 10

demonstrate that the extra fare ticket had, in fact, been issued by
another ticket examiner in respect of the said passenger.
12.

We also agree with the tribunal in its observation that at

best the respondent could be charged with negligence in the
discharge of his duties, inasmuch as, he displayed ignorance of the
fact that Dr Singh was traveling in the coach which was under his
supervisory control. However, since he was not involved in accepting
the old ticket and the extra fare, or in the issuance of the extra fare
ticket to Dr Singh, and the extra fare had in fact been deposited in the
petitioner’s coffers, it could not be said that he was guilty of
misconduct.

In the circumstances, the punishment of compulsory

retirement was too harsh and not called for and was rightly set aside
by the tribunal.
13.

We also note that the tribunal granted limited relief to the

respondent, inasmuch as, all that the tribunal directed was that the
pension of the respondent be fixed in a manner, as if he was
continuing in service till the date of his attaining the age of
superannuation. The respondent was held to be entitled to receive
the extra pension from the date of his superannuation. However, he
was not reinstated in service from the date of his compulsory
retirement and the petitioner was not directed to pay arrears of salary
to the respondent till the date of his superannuation.

14.

In our view, the tribunal has taken a balanced

WP(C) No.6376/2007

Page 9 of 10

approach in the matter and we do not find this to be an
appropriate case which calls for interference by us while
judicially reviewing the tribunal's order. Accordingly, we dismiss
this petition and directed the petitioner to comply with the order
of the tribunal, if not already complied with, within two months
from today.

VIPIN SANGHI, J.

A.K.SIKRI, J.
August 31, 2007
P.K. BABBAR

WP(C) No.6376/2007

Page 10 of 10

