*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

WP(C) No. 10558/2006 & CM No.7988/2006

%
#
!

Date of decision: October 31, 2007.
Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan,
Through:

.....

Petitioner

Mr. S.Rajappa, Advocate
versus

$
^

Sh. Balbir Singh
Through:

..... Respondent
Mr.Subhash Sharma, Advocate

*CORAM
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K. SIKRI
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
A.K. SIKRI, J.
:
1.
The Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan (KVS) adopted the
Assured Career Progression Scheme

(for short ACP Scheme) of the

Government and given the nomenclature as “Career Advancement
Scheme” vide memo dated 12.10.2000. The entire ACP scheme was

wpc.10558.06

page 1 of 7

adopted as it is. The question has arisen as to how this scheme is to
be applied in a case where a particular employee refused promotion
offered to him in the normal course. We may state the facts of this
case before we dwell on this issue.
2.

The respondent herein joined the Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan

as group-D employee on 13.8.1965.

On 15.3.1999 he was offered

promotion to the post of laboratory attendant
accept.

which he declined to

Another offer for promotion to the same post was given on

7.12.2000 and the respondent again turned down this offer.

Before

the second offer for promotion was given the Career Advancement
Scheme was introduced to take care of acute stagnation in the service
career of those who were not able to get promotion though otherwsie
eligible, by giving them the benefit of higher pay.

Two such benefits

are provided under this scheme, namely, on the completion of 12 years
and 24 years of service respectively.

In case an employee gets

promotion in normal course before the expiry of 12 years service, he is
not entitled to the first benefit of financial upgradation under the said
scheme after the expiry of 12 years. In that event he would get only
the second upgradation 12 years after the promotion if he does not
get any promotion in the meantime though otherwise eligible.
3.

When a person is offered promotion and he refuses to accept it,

the same would mean that he did not avail of the promotion. What

wpc.10558.06

page 2 of 7

would be the consequence thereof is provided under the

Scheme

itself. For this purpose two conditions mentioned in the scheme, which
would be relevant for our purpose are condition No.5.1 and condition
No.10. We reproduce both these conditions hereunder:
Condition No.5.1
“Two financial upgradation under the ACP Scheme in the
entire Government service career of an employee shall be
counted against regular promotions (including in situ
promotion and fast track promotion availed through limited
departmental competitive examination) availed from the
grade in which an employee was appointed as a direct
recruit. This shall mean that two financial upgradations
under the ACP Scheme shall be available only if no regular
promotion during the prescribed periods (12 and 24 years)
have been availed by an employee. If employee has
already got one regular promotion, he shall qualify for the
second financial upgradation only on completion of 24
years of regular service under the ACP Scheme. In case
two prior promotions on regular basis have been already
been received by an employee, no benefit under the ACP
Scheme shall accrue to him.”
Condition No.10
“Grant of higher pay-scale under the ACP Scheme shall be
conditional to the fact that an employee, while accepting
the said benefit, shall be deemed to have given his
unqualified acceptance for regular promotion on
occurrence of vacancy subsequently. In case he refuses to
accept
the
higher
post
on
regular
promotion
subsequently, he shall be subject to normal debarment for
regular promotion as prescribed in the general instructions
in this regard. However, as and when he accepts regular
promotion thereafter, he shall become eligible for the
second upgradation under the ACP Scheme only after he
completes the required eligibility service period under the
ACP Scheme in that higher grade subject to the condition
that the period for which he was debarred for regular
promotion shall not count for the purpose. For example, if
wpc.10558.06

page 3 of 7

a person has got one financial upgradation after rendering
12 years of regular service and after 2 years therefrom if
he refuses regular promotion and is consequently
debarred for one year and subsequently he is promoted to
the higher grade on regular basis after completion of 15
years (12+2+1) of regular service, he shall be eligible for
consideration for the second upgradation under the ACP
Scheme only after rendering 10 more years in addition to
two years of service already rendered by him after the first
financial upgradation (2+10) in that higher grade i.e. after
25 years (12+2+1-10) of the regular service because the
debarment period of one year cannot be taken into
account towards the required 12 years of regular service
in the higher grade.”
5.

The condition stipulated in para 5.1, inter alia, records that the

benefit of two financial upgradation under the ACP Scheme shall be
available only if no regular promotion during the prescribed periods (12
years and 24 years) have been availed by an employee. It would be
clear from the above that in case promotion is offered, a particular
employee does not avail the same, it may mean that he is not entitled
to the financial upgradation under the ACP Scheme. Consequence of
the aforesaid eventuality is specifically provided in condition No.10.
As

per this condition,

in a case where an employee has not been

given any promotion for a period of 12 years, while granting him higher
payscale under the ACP Scheme, it would be subject to the condition
that he gives unqualified acceptance for regular promotion on
occurrence of vacancy subsequently. That means that at the time the
first ACP benefit on the expiry of 12 years is given to the incumbent.

wpc.10558.06

page 4 of 7

While taking this benefit the official is to give an undertaking that he
would accept the promotion whenever offered to him subsequently. In
case he refuses to accept the promotion to the higher post when
offered at a future date, this condition further provides that in such a
situation he would be debarred from regular promotion as prescribed in
general instructions in this regard. Moreover, he will be given second
upgradation only if he accepts regular promotion thereafter. As far as
first upgradation is concerned, the official keeps on enjoying and the
same is not

taken away.

The adverse effect of not accepting

promotion is debarment from promotion for specified period and nongrant of second upgradation till promotion is accepted and deferment
of second upgradation by a specified period. This fact is so stated by
the Tribunal in para 14 of the impugned judgment which reads as
under:
“14. Coming to condition No.10, learned counsel for the
applicant has fervently argued that the mischief of this
condition would come into play only after the financial
upgradation had been granted to an employee and not before
that. There seems force in this contention. A careful scrutiny
of this condition would show that an employee who had been
granted upgradation under the scheme if subsequently
refused to accept the higher post on regular promotion, he
would render himself ineligible for grant of second financial
upgradation until he accepts the regular promotion. He will
then become eligible for second financial upgradation on
completion of 12 years regular service from the date of first
upgradation excluding normal debarment period from
counting. The scope and import of this rule have been
illustrated in this condition by an example given which need
not be elaborated.”
wpc.10558.06

page 5 of 7

6.

The interpretation given above by the Tribunal in our view, is

correct in law. In the present case, respondent had joined the services
with the petitioner in the year 1965. Therefore, he had completed 24
years of service when memo dated 3.10.2000 promulgating the ACP
scheme in KVS was introduced. However, after the expiry of 12 years ,
but before the expiry of 24 years of service, he was offered promotion
on 15.8.1999 which he has refused.

As per condition No.10, he

became entitled to first upgradation but could not have been given
second upgradation as he had refused the said promotion.

As per

conditions contained in para-10 of the scheme, benefit of second ACP
upgradation is to be given only after the concerned employee accepts
promotion subsequently offered, even when he had rejected it once.
Therefore,

according to

this condition, benefit of first upgradation

under ACP scheme was to be given to the respondent but he was not
entitled to the second upgradation as he had refused promotion even
on

17.12.2000 i.e after the adoption of the scheme by KVS, when

offered to him. Therefore, while the Tribunal is right insofar as grant
of first upgradation after 12 years is concerned, the conclusion of the
learned Tribunal that declining of benefit of second upgradation to the
applicant is not justified, does not appear to be correct.
7.

This petition is, therefore, allowed partly. The judgment of the

Tribunal is modified.
wpc.10558.06

It is ordered that respondent herein shall be
page 6 of 7

entitled to grant of first financial upgradation as on 12.10.2000 when
the scheme came into force, and not to the second financial
upgradation.
8.

In these circumstances the parties are left to bear their own

costs.

A.K. SIKRI, J.

VIPIN SANGHI, J.
October 31, 2007
aj

wpc.10558.06

page 7 of 7

