*

IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

+

Co. Appl. No.79/2008 in Co. Pet. No.222/2001

%

Date of order:

January 31, 2008

Kostub Investments Limited
Through:

..... Petitioner
Mr.Sandeep Arya, Advocate

versus
Reinz Talbros Limited

..... Respondent
Through: Mr. Bhuvan Gugnani, Adv. for
the respondent/applicant
Mr.Mayank Goel, Adv. for the
Official Liquidator.
Mr.A.K.Chaturvedi,Official
Liquidator
Mr. R.P. Aggarwal, Adv. for
Bank of Baroda.

CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?
VIPIN SANGHI, J.
1.

The O.L. was appointed as Provisional Liquidator in this

case on 25th February 2002. This is an application filed by the Ex.
Managing Director of the Company for seeking, inter-alia, the relief of
setting aside the sale of the property of the Company in liquidation,
which has been confirmed by this court, following the invitation of

Co. Pet. No. 222/2001

page 1 of 10

bids and consequent upon auction held in court in the presence of the
Ex. Directors.

Vide order dated 25.1.2007 on report 93/2006, this

court appointed Mr. M.L. Gupta & Associates as the valuer of, interalia, property No.B-8, Site B, Surajpur Industrial Area, Greater Noida,
UP (Surajpur Property). The valuation report made by M.L. Gupta &
Associate was received by the court and taken on record and vide
order

dated

19.4.2007,

the

court

directed

issuance

of

sale

proclamation considering the valuation given in the valuation report
in accordance with the rules.
2.

The valuation report of the

valuer appointed by this

Court was called for to value the company's property situated at B-8,
Surajpur Industrial Area, Greater Noida, UP (Surajpur property). This
was brought on record. As per this valuation report the Surajpur
property was valued at Rs.5,49,64,000/-.

The applicant filed CA

No.666/2007 for setting aside the order dated 25.2.2002 whereby the
Provisional Official Liquidator was appointed. This application was
listed before the court on the judicial side on 11.7.2007. Notice was
issued on the application and time was granted to the non-applicants
for filing their replies. The matter was adjourned to 12th September
2007. However, no interim stay of disposal of the properties including
the Surajpur property was passed by the court. On 12.7.2007 the
matter was again taken in chamber. The applicant was also
represented. He pointed out that he had already filed an application
Co. Pet. No. 222/2001

page 2 of 10

being CA No.666/2007 for setting aside the order dated 25.2.2002
whereby the provisional liquidator was appointed and stated that the
applicant is ready to settle the claims of the creditors. The court took
notice of the fact that CA 666/2006 was listed before the Court on
11.7.2007 and had been adjourned to 12.9.2007; that there was no
stay of the auction of the property of the company in liquidation; that
no steps had been taken by the Ex. Directors since the issuance of
the sale notice on 11.5.2007, and that the offer of the ex director to
deposit Rs.50 lakhs in Court allegedly due
amounts due to the creditors

towards

the principal

was refuted by the counsel for Bank of

Baroda who stated that more than Rs.7 crores was due from the
company in liquidation. Thus Court did not agree to postponment of
the auction since no steps have been taken by the ex director or any
other person for settlement of the outstanding dues of the creditors
and no details of payment and alleged proposal for settlement had
been furnished by the ex director. Thereafter the Court proceeded to
examine the bids that had been received. There were six bidders and
open bidding was held in the Court. The highest bid of Rs.5.55 crores
was given by one Pavas Chemicals Pvt. Ltd and the second highest
bid was for Rs.5.52 crores given by GCG Enterprises Pvt. Ltd.

The

reserve price was Rs.3,29,78,400/-, that is, about 60% of the
valuation done by the valuer. The secured creditor, Bank of Baroda
did not dispute the reserve price and did not produce any valuation of

Co. Pet. No. 222/2001

page 3 of 10

its own. Since the highest bids of Rs.5.55 crores was higher than the
reserve price the same was accepted by this Court.

The earnest

money deposited by the highest and the second highest bidder was
retained and the highest bidder was

required to make deposit

of

25% of the bid amount as EMD and the balance was to be deposited
within 60 days. The auction purchaser deposited the entire amount
as directed

on 10.9.2007 and possession was delivered to the

auction purchaser on 14.9.2007. The sale was confirmed in favour of
the auction purchaser on 29.11.2007.

Even on that date the ex

director was represented and made a statement that a proposal for
settlement of dues had been sent to Bank of Baroda which was under
active consideration.

This statement of the ex director was disputed

by the counsel for the Bank of Baroda. The applicant withdrew CA
No.666/2007 on 12.9.2007. Pertinently, no liberty was sought to file
any other application in respect of auction of the Surajpur Property
when the said application was withdrawn.
3.

The first submission of the applicant is

that the

valuation of about Rs.5.55 crore done by the valuer M/s M.L. Gupta
and Associates is far below the market price. The applicant claimes
that the present value of the property is about Rs.13 crores as per
report made by M/s Chadha and Associates, a valuer on the panel
prepared by this Court. He also states that the valuation done by M/s.
M.L. Gupta & Associates is lower than even the circle rate. The next
Co. Pet. No. 222/2001

page 4 of 10

submission of the applicant is that the official liquidator was
appointed as the provisional liquidator and he could not have sold the
property in auction since the property did not vest in him. He could
not have transferred the title to the property in favour of the auction
purchaser. The third submission of the applicant is that there was a
stay granted by the Allahabad High Court against the disposal of the
assets of the company, i.e., the factory, including fixed assets and
material in the factory without the leave of the single Judge of that
Court, in Special Leave No.889/2002 titled M/s Reinz Talbros Ltd.
vs. Deputy Labour Commissioner, Gautam Budh Nagar and
Ors. He also relied on Allahabad Bank vs. Bengal Paper Mills
Co. Limited, (1999) 4 SCC 383

to submit that the interest of the

creditors is paramount and the court should ensure that the

best

price is fetched for the property belonging to the company that is sold
by the court.

He relied on Union Bank of India vs. Official

Liquidator H.C. Of Calcutta, (2000) 5 SCC 274

to state that it is

the obligation of the court to ensure that the valuation report brings
out

the market value of the property that is proposed to be sold,

even if no objections are raised to such valuation.
4.

Having considered the submissions of the applicant, I

am of the view that this application has no merit and the same is
liable to be dismissed. My reasons are as follow:

Co. Pet. No. 222/2001

page 5 of 10

5.

During the course of his arguments, learned counsel for

the applicant submitted that the auction purchaser, as per the
knowledge of the applicant is finalising the sale of the property at a
value of about Rs.8 crores. Firstly, there is no material whatsoever
brought

on record

to support this statement.

statement of the applicant itself

Moreover, this

demolishes the submission of the

applicant based on the valuation report prepared by M/s Chadha and
Associates. Pertinently, the auction took place about six months ago,
i.e., in July 2007. It is nobody's case that property prices have since
than come down. If the current market price is Rs.8 crores, one fails
to understand how it could be valued at Rs.13 crores in July, 2007. It
is well known that a property sold in court auction hardly ever fetches
its true market value because of the uncertainties involved in the
entire transaction. Court auctions are invariably challenged by one or
the other party, as in the present case. Very often, the auction
purchaser get stuck with such transaction, which are neither
concluded

due

to

objections

and

challenges

nor

cancelled.

Investments made by them remain unfruitful and uncertainties loom
large. Therefore, while examining a plea that the price fetched in a
court auction is below the market price (at which a transaction at
arms length would take place), one has to consider these realities.
Some amount of depreciation in the value is bound to be there when
the property is sold in a court auction.

Co. Pet. No. 222/2001

Considering that even

page 6 of 10

according to the applicant the market price of the Surajpur property
as on date is Rs. 8 crores, when it is about to be sold by a private sale
between two persons, the price at which the same was sold in a court
auction over six months ago i.e. Rs.5.55 crores does not appear to be
less than the reasonable value thereof at the relevant time. At this
stage counsel for the applicant states that, in fact, the said property
is proposed to be sold for Rs.11 crores. This submission is clearly an
afterthought and has been made during the course of dictation of the
order, and it only needs to be rejected.

No material has been

produced by the applicant in support of his aforesaid plea, and this
submission only raises doubts about the sincerity and conviction with
which the petitioner contends that the property was sold at a price
much below the market price.
6.

His further grievance is that the Court while confirming

the sale ignored the fact that CA No.666/2007 was also pending. By
urging these submission, the applicant is in fact seeking a review of
the order dated 12.7.2007 passed in chambers, whereby the Court
had, in the presence of the applicant, accepted the highest bid of
Rs.5.55 crores and confirmed the sale. In my view, if the applicant
had any grievance with the said order whereby the court proceeded
to auction the Surajpur Property and confirm the sale, the correct
thing to do was to challenge the said order. I am not hearing a review
of that order, and cannot go behind the said order.
Co. Pet. No. 222/2001

page 7 of 10

7.

The submission that the valuation done by M/s M.L.

Gupta and Associates was even below the circle rate is also of no
avail for the aforesaid reasons. The property has been put to auction
in open Court in the presence of the applicant, and even the secured
creditor, whose dues are more than the amount at which the property
has been sold has also accepted the valuation and not questioned
the sale. I, therefore, reject this submission as well.
8.

The submission that the provisional liquidator is not

entitled to sell the property of the company is also misplaced in view
of the express provisions contained in Section 450 of the Companies
Act, 1956. The said Section states that the official liquidator may be
appointed as the provisional liquidator and that he shall have the
same powers as an official liquidator, provided that the Court may
limit or restrict his powers by the order appointing him, or by any
subsequent order. Section 457 of the Act specifically empowers the
liquidator, with the sanction of the Court, to sell the immovable and
movable property and auctionable claims of the company by public
auction or private contract, with power to transfer the whole or part
thereof to any person or body corporate, or to sell the same in
parcels. In the present case, the Court had directed issuance of the
sale proclamation and it is in pursuance thereof that the official
liquidator, acting as the provisional liquidator, has put the property to
auction.

In fact the auction was held in the Court amongst the

Co. Pet. No. 222/2001

page 8 of 10

bidders who had given their bids in response to the advertisement.
No limitation was put on the powers and authority of the official
liquidator to deal with the property of the company in liquidation
either in the order dated 25.2.2002, or in any other subsequent order
of the court. On the contrary, the court directed and approved the
sale of the Surajpur Property. Therefore, reliance placed by the
applicant in support of the aforesaid submission on the decision of the
Madras High Court in Sri Chamundi Theatre Mysore Talkies Ltd.
vs. S. Chandrasekara Rao 45 Comp. Cases 60 is of no avail. The
facts of the present case are materially different from the case cited
by the applicant.
9.

So far as the stay granted by the Allahabad High Court

in

Special Appeal No.889/2002 is concerned, the applicant has failed

to state and substantiate that the said order was ever communicated
to the official liquidator or to this Court. Pertinently this order, though
passed on 23.8.2002 was not brought to the notice of this Court even
when the applicant had filed CA No.666/2007. The official liquidator
is not even a party in those proceedings. Consequently it cannot be
said that the sale of the property has taken place in violation of the
Court order since its communication was as important, as the fact
that it had been passed.
10.

Reliance placed by the applicant on the decision

Co. Pet. No. 222/2001

page 9 of 10

in

Allahbad Bank (supra) and Union Bank of India (supra) as also
on Lica (P) (No.1) v. Official Liquidator, (2000) 6 SCC 79
misplaced in the facts of this case.

As aforesaid the Court

are
while

confirming the sale, records its satisfaction that the property had
been sold at the best price that it could fetch on the relevant date
and no cogent material has been placed on record for the court to
conclude that the sale in court auction was below the market price of
the property on the relevant date. In my view, since there was no
procedural infirmity in the process of sale, and no case of fraud etc.
has been made out, merely because with the passage of time the
price of the property has gone up, its sale cannot be set aside by the
court, particularly when it appears to have been sold on the prevailing
market price on the relevant date.
11.

Accordingly I reject this application with cost of

Rs.10,000/-. 50% of the cost be paid to the secured creditor, that is,
Bank of Baroda and 50%

to the Common Pool Fund of the official

liquidator. Cost be paid within a week.

January 31, 2008

VIPIN SANGHI, J.

aj/P.K. BABBAR

Co. Pet. No. 222/2001

page 10 of 10

