*

HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI

+

C.M. (M) No.50/2005

%

Date of decision: 31.01.2008
Parkash Narain Mathur
Through:

.....Petitioner
Mr.Raman Duggal,
Advocate

versus
Shanti Parshad Jain & Ors.
..... Respondent
Through: Mr. P.K. Bhardwaj, Adv.
for the Respondent No.1(d) & 2.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may
be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?

Yes

3. Whether the judgment should be reported
in the Digest?

Yes

VIPIN SANGHI, J
*
1.

This Petition under Article 227 of the Constitution of

India has bee preferred to impugn the order dated 5.11.2004 passed
by the learned Additional Rent Control Tribunal, Delhi, (for short the
`RCT') whereby the said RCT allowed the Respondent-tenants appeal
under Section 38 of the Delhi Rent Control Act (for short the `Act')
against the order dated 18.5.2004 passed by the learned Rent
Controller, Delhi in E-10/1988 whereby he allowed the application
filed by the petitioner- landlord under Section 15(7) of the Act and

C.M. (M) No.50/2005

Page 1 of 15

dismissed the Respondent's application for condonation of delay in
depositing the rent, filed under Section 151 CPC and consequently
struck off the defence of the Respondent tenant.

2.

The facts in brief are that the petitioner landlord had

preferred the aforesaid eviction Petition, inter alia, on the grounds
contained in section 14(1)(a) and 14(1)(b) of the Act viz. non payment
of rent and sub-letting. The Petition was filed against the original
tenant Shri Shanti Prasad Jain. In those proceedings during the life
time of Shri Shanti Prasad Jain an order was passed under Section
15(1) of the Act on 15.3.1989 directing the tenant to pay or deposit
rent @ 105/- per month with effect from 1.1.1985 and to continue to
pay or deposit rent at the said rate by 15th of each succeeding month.
During the lifetime of Shri Shanti Prasad Jain, undisputedly the rent
was regularly paid in terms of the said order. One of the sons of Shri
Shanti Prasad Jain moved an application under Order 1 Rule 10 CPC in
the year 1995 before the Rent Controller seeking impleadment on the
grounds that he is a member of the HUF of Shri Shanti Prasad Jain and
that he is running the business in the name and style of M/s.
Vardhman Jewels (India) as the member of the HUF and that he was
not a sub-tenant in the premises. This application filed by Sunil Kumar
Jain was allowed by the learned Rent Controller on 1.9.1995. Against
this

order,

the

petitioner

landlord

preferred

Civil

Revision

No.1043/1995. In this Revision Petition this court stayed further
proceedings in the eviction petition.
C.M. (M) No.50/2005

Page 2 of 15

3.

Shri Shanti Prasad Jain, the tenant passed away on

23.5.1997. After his death, admittedly, the rent was not paid in terms
of the aforesaid order passed under Section 15(1) of the Act. The
admitted position with regard to the default and the belated payment
of rent is as follows:
1.
2.

Rent for the period September 1999 to September 2000
was deposited on 27.3.2000.

3.

4.

Rent for the period 23.5.1997 to August 1999 was
deposited on 2.9.1999.

Rent for the period October 2000 to March 2003 was
deposited on 27.9.2002.
On the basis of the aforesaid defaults, the petitioner

landlord filed an application under Section 15(7) of the Act for striking
out the defence of the tenant. This application was filed on 3.1.2003.
A reply was filed to this application by the legal representatives of the
deceased tenant viz. Shri Rakesh Jain and Shri Sunil Jain on 5.2.2003.
The stand taken in this reply was that the deceased tenant used to
pay rent to the clerk for deposit as was informed to the said LRs. It
was further stated that the proceedings before the Controller were
stayed in the Civil Revision No.1043/1995 and that the up to date rent
stands paid before the filing of the said application. While the said
application under Section 15(7) was pending consideration, the
respondent also filed an application under Section 151 CPC for
condonation of delay on 13.2.2004. By this application

the

Respondents sought the condonation of delay in making the deposit
of rent as aforesaid. The cause shown by the Respondents in this
C.M. (M) No.50/2005

Page 3 of 15

application was that during his lifetime, Shri Shanti Prasad Jain the
tenant used to send the rent through his clerk to the then counsel.
Believing that the counsel would be taking steps to make the deposit
of rent, no query was made from the clerk as no application was filed
by the petitioner regarding any delay or non payment of rent. It was
therefore presumed that the order had been complied with in strict
sense. It was further stated that the eviction proceedings had been
stayed by the High Court in Civil Revision No.1043/1995. Another
ground stated was that upon the death of the tenant Shri Shanti
Prasad Jain, the petitioner had moved an application to bring the LRs
of the deceased tenant on record, which was allowed only on
21.10.2002 in the aforesaid Revision Petition. In para 5 of the
application, however, a different version appeared. It was stated that
after the death of the respondent, the Respondents/applicants had
again contacted their counsel for deposit of rent and the counsel has
advised that there would no necessity of depositing of rent till the LRs
are brought on record. It was further claimed that the rent was sent
by the applicants regularly to the counsel to get the same deposited
so that the interest of the applicants is protected. But the counsel
assured that the applicants would not suffer on account of rent not
being so deposited. Even after the filing of the application under
Section 15(7) of the Act, according to the respondent, they were
again assured that since, prior to the said application being filed, the
rent had already been deposited, and the LRs had not yet been
impleaded as party to the eviction proceedings, the applicants need
C.M. (M) No.50/2005

Page 4 of 15

not worry. The applicants stated that they trusted their counsel and
acted in good faith and that the delay, if any, in depositing the rent
was not intentional or deliberate and it was on account of the advise
of the counsel.

5.

The

learned

Rent

Controller

by

his

order

dated

18.5.2004 disposed of both the aforesaid applications namely the one
filed under Section 15(7) of the Act by the landlord and the
application for seeking condonation of delay under Section 151 CPC
filed by the respondent. He did not find merit in respondent's
application for seeking condonation of delay and at the same time
found that the Respondents had disregarded the order passed under
Section 15(1) of the Act and consequently struck off the defence of
the Respondents. By the impugned order the Tribunal, in appeal, has
reversed the said order passed by the Controller.

6.

The Tribunal in its impugned order posed a question of

law, that is, whether the legal heirs of a sole tenant are bound to
comply with the order passed under Section 15(1) of the Act before
they are brought on record as legal representatives of the deceased
tenant. The Tribunal took the view that notwithstanding the fact that
succession is not held in abeyance

and takes effect immediately

upon the demise of a person, and the

definition of expression

“tenant” under the Act includes the legal heirs of the tenant, till the
legal representatives are brought on record by the Court, there is no

C.M. (M) No.50/2005

Page 5 of 15

obligation on the legal heirs to comply with the order passed under
Section 15(1) of the Act. The Tribunal also took the view that the
present was a case wherein there was only one tenant and upon the
death of the sole tenant until the legal representatives are brought on
record, they are not obliged to comply with the order passed under
Section 15(1) of the Act. It was also held that the order whereby one
of the sons, viz. Shri Sunil Kumar Jain was impleaded

as a party

-respondent in the eviction proceedings on 1.9.1995 had been stayed
by this Court in CR No.1043/1995.

7.

Having considered the matter, I am of the view that the

order of the learned Tribunal is wrong on all counts and the order
passed by the learned Rent Controller was perfectly correct and
justified.

The errors committed by the Tribunal has clearly led to

failure of justice. Firstly, the Tribunal has completely gone wrong in
failing to appreciate that the application filed by Shri Sunil Kumar Jain
seeking imleadment as a party-respondent on the ground that he is a
member of the HUF of late Shri Shanti Prasad Jain and that the HUF is
the tenant had been allowed by the Rent Controller on 1.9.1995, and
in CR No.1043/1995 this Court had merely stayed further proceedings
in the eviction petition, and there was no stay of the said order dated
1.9.1995. Therefore, the Tribunal was wrong in observing that the
order directing impleadment of Shri Sunil Kumar Jain itself had been
stayed by this court.

C.M. (M) No.50/2005

Page 6 of 15

8.

After the death of Shri Shanti Prasad Jain, it, therefore,

became the obligation of Shri Sunil Kumar Jain, who asserted his right
as a member of the HUF (which was claimed to be the tenant in the
suit premises) to comply with the order under Section 15(1) of the
Act. Every right has the corresponding obligation, and when a person
asserts his rights as a tenant and occupies the tenancy premises he
cannot remain oblivious of his obligation to pay or deposit the rent.
The Tribunal was also not correct in concluding that merely because
the formal order brining the legal representatives of late Shri Shanti
Prasad Jain had not been passed, the obligation of his legal heirs to
pay rent stood suspended till they were brought on record as legal
representatives.

As

rightly argued by the petitioner, succession

does not remain in abeyance.

Immediately on the demise of the

tenant the rights of tenancy, which are heritable stand vested in the
legal heirs of the deceased tenant. It is by virtue of those rights that
the legal heirs of the deceased tenant continue to

enjoy the

protection of the law and cannot be evicted from the suit premises
except in accordance with the law. The legal heirs of the deceased
tenant cannot claim such a right without, at the same time,
discharging the obligation accompany that right.

Upon the death of

late Shri Shanti Prasad Jain it, therefore, became the obligation of his
legal heirs, who were in use and occupation of the suit premises to
pay or deposit the rent in terms of the order passed under Section
15(1) of the Act. Even if it were to be assumed that other legal heirs
of late Shri Shanti Prasad Jain were ignorant of their rights and the
C.M. (M) No.50/2005

Page 7 of 15

corresponding obligation in respect of the tenancy premises, at least
Shri Sunil Prasad Jain was well aware of the same. He had, on his
own, moved an application seeking impleadment as a partyrespondent and had been so impleaded in the eviction petition on
1.9.1995. At least Shri Sunil Kumar Jain could not have avoided the
obligation to comply with the order under Section 15(1) of the Act on
any ground whatsoever.

Pertinently, the respondents were well

aware of their said obligation and precisely for that reason they did
pay the rent for the aforesaid period from time to time on their own
and at their convenience. Had the respondents been under any bona
fide impression, as claimed by them, that they were not liable to pay
the rent

until they were formally brought on record as the legal

representatives of the deceased tenant, there would have been no
reason for them to have deposited the rent on three occasions,
though highly belatedly, on 2.9.1999, 27.3.2000 and 27.9.2002.
These deposits were admittedly made without waiting for the
petitioner to move an application under Section 15(7) of the Act. It is
also pertinent to note that the application for bringing

the legal

representatives of the deceased tenant on record had been moved
soon after the demise of late Shri Shanti Prasad Jain on 23.5.1997. It
is not

as if there was any doubt in the minds of any of the

respondents with regard to their right to come on record as the legal
representatives of the deceased tenant on account of their being the
legal heirs of late Shri Shanti Prasad Jain. The application filed under
Order XXII Rule 4 CPC admittedly was not
C.M. (M) No.50/2005

contested by the
Page 8 of 15

respondents, and there were no competing claims between the legal
heirs with regard to their respective rights to come on record as the
legal representatives of the deceased tenant.

Merely because the

said application under Order 22 CPC, though filed in July, 1997
continued to remain pending before the Rent Controller, and was
formally allowed only on 24.7.2003, in my view it did not absolve the
respondents of their obligation to continue to pay the rent after the
demise of the tenant in compliance of the order under Section 15(1)
of the Act in the meantime.

Reliance has been placed by the petitioner on a decision
of the Supreme Court in Smt. Pushpa Devi and Ors. vs. Milkhi
Ram (Dead) by his LRs, AIR 1990 SC 808. Though dealing with the
provisions of the

East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act, this

authority is relevant and the principal laid down therein is applicable
in the facts of the present case as well. The Supreme Court in this
decision has held that keeping in view the spirit and purpose for
which the expression 'tenant' has been defined in the Act (in this case
East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act), the word 'tenant' should be
construed liberally so as to include a “person claiming to be a
tenant”. The Supreme Court held that the obligation to tender rent
does not depend upon the existence of admitted jural relationship of
landlord and tenant. In that case, the landlord did not accept the rent
from person who claimed themselves to be the legal heirs of the
deceased tenant. He disputed their claim to have stepped into the
C.M. (M) No.50/2005

Page 9 of 15

shoes of the tenant. At the same time, he sought eviction on the
ground that the rent had not been paid or deposited by the tenant.
The Punjab and Haryana High Court accepted this contentions of the
landlord by holding that the tender of rent by a stranger was not valid
and could not be construed as a valid tender by the tenant. The
Supreme Court as aforesaid reversed that decision. In the present
case, the position is the reverse. The landlord has no difficulty in
accepting the legal heirs of the deceased defendant as tenants, but it
is they, who have sought to justify their defaults in tendering the rent
by denying their obligation to tender the rent after the demise of the
tenant.

9.

The Tribunal, in view of the aforesaid errors committed

by it, failed to consider and to into the issue whether the respondent's
application under Section 151 CPC seeking condonation of delay in
the deposit of rent deserves to be allowed, or whether the defense
of the respondents ought to have been struck off or not. The Rent
Controller in his detailed order as dealt with these aspects and, in my
view, the reasoning given by the Controller for rejecting the
application of the respondent seeking condonation of delay and in
proceeding to pas an order under Section 15(7) of the Act striking off
the defense of the respondent is correct and deserves to be upheld.
The Rent Controller rightly takes note of the relevant

facts which

emerge from the record. My reasons for agreeing with the controller
are;
C.M. (M) No.50/2005

Page 10 of 15

(i)

the stands taken by the respondents are contradictory.

On the one hand it is pleaded that the respondents were
regularly tendering the rent

to their counsel for being

deposited in the Court even after the demise of late Shri Shanti
Prasad Jain. On the other hand their stand was that they had
been advised by their counsel that they were not obliged to pay
the rent till they are

brought on record as the legal

representatives of the deceased tenant in the eviction petition.
It is not clear why the respondents should have continued to
tender the rent as allegedly done by them to their counsel if
the advise was that they

were not obliged to pay or tender

the rent till they were formally brought on record as the legal
representatives of the deceased tenant.

This stand

of the

respondent also does not explain why they, in fact, deposited
the rent highly belatedly and as lump sums on three occasions
only between

the

the period

23.5.1997

to 27.9.2002.

Admittedly they came on record as legal representatives only
in the year 2003 when the petitioner's application under Order
XXII to bring them on record was allowed by the Rent Controller
on 24.7.2003;

(ii)

The application seeking condonation of delay was not

supported by the affidavit of the counsel

who is

alleged to

have received the rent from the respondents from time to time
and failed to deposit the same in the Court and is also alleged
C.M. (M) No.50/2005

Page 11 of 15

to have tendered the advice that the rent need not be paid or
deposited till the respondents are brought on record. No action
appears to have been taken against the counsel before the Bar
Council complaining about his aforesaid conduct. I may note
that though it was stated by the respondents in their reply to
the application under Section 15(7) of the Act that they had
taken action against the counsel, no details thereof were
furnished before the Lower Court and none have been furnished
even before me. Thus, the respondents have failed to disclose
what action has been taken by them against their erstwhile
counsel. This belies their stand with regard to the legal advise
allegedly given by their counsel and also the stand that they
had tendered the rents regularly to their counsel who failed to
deposit the same in court;

(iii)

There was no stay of the order passed under Section

15(1) of the Act requiring the tenant to deposit the rent nor was
the order passed on the application of

Shri Sunil Kumar Jain

directing his impleadment as a party-respondent in the eviction
petition stayed. In CR No.1043/1995 merely further proceedings
had been stayed in the eviction petition.

(iv)

The

application for seeking condonation of delay under

Section 151 CPC was filed only on 13.2.2004, whereas the
application under Section 15(7) of the Act had been filed by the

C.M. (M) No.50/2005

Page 12 of 15

petitioner landlord on 3.1.2003.

Even in this application

seeking condonation of delay, the ground taken was that the
rent used to be paid through the clerk to the counsel. Under the
belief that the counsel would take steps to get the same
deposited, no query was made from him as no application was
filed by the petitioners regarding the delay or non-payment of
rent as per the order dated 15.3.1989.

Therefore, it was

presumed that the order had been complied with

in strict

sense. However, no receipt of the amount allegedly paid to the
clerk or to the counsel

for being deposited towards the rent

was produced by the respondents.

The allegation itself is

totally vague. No details/particulars of the clerk, his statement
etc., have been furnished. There is no positive and definite
statement that the rents were, after the demise of Late Shri
Shanti Prasad Jain, tendered regularly to either the clerk or the
advocate on a monthly basis.

(v)

Even though the controller has the power to condone the

delay in the deposit of rent in compliance of the order passed
under Section 15(1) of the Act, delay would be condoned only
where it is found that the conduct of the tenant in failing to
deposit the rent is not contemptuous and there are good and
sufficient reasons furnished for the default. In the present case
the reasons given by the respondents do not inspire any
confidence and certainly were not good enough which could be
C.M. (M) No.50/2005

Page 13 of 15

accepted and the delay condoned. It is clear from the conduct
of the respondents that they acted most casually and deposited
the rents as per their own sweet will and in utter disregard of
the order passed under Section 15(1) of the Act. Rent for a
period of over two years after the demise of late Shri Shanti
Prasad Jain remained unpaid and was deposited on 2.9.1999.
Similarly, for the period September, 1997 to September 2000,
i.e., a period of three years, the rent was deposited in lump sum
on 27.3.2000.

Once again from October, 2000 onwards rent

was again not deposited uptil 27.9.2002.

(vi)

From the aforesaid it is clear that the respondents did not

deserve

any sympathy and discretion could not have been

exercised in their favour to condone the delay in the deposit of
rent. Merely because the application seeking striking off the
defense of the respondent was filed after the rent for the
defaulted period had been paid, would not dis-entitle the
landlord from praying that the defense of the respondents be
struck off. The application under Section 15(7) of the Act, could
not be moved earlier by the petitioner since the stay granted by
this Court in CR No.1043/1995 was in operation and continued
to operate till 23.10.2002 when the aforesaid civil revision
petition was disposed of by this Court.

10.

For the aforesaid reasons I

C.M. (M) No.50/2005

allow this petition and

Page 14 of 15

quash the impugned order passed by the Tribunal dated 5.11.2004
and restore the order passed by the Rent Controller, Delhi in E-10/88
dated 18.5.2004 whereby the defense of the respondents had been
struck off. The eviction petition is revived. The petitioner shall also be
entitled to costs of Rs.15,000/-.

11.
Controller

I direct the parties to appear before the Rent
on 22.2.2008 for further proceedings in the eviction

petition.

VIPIN SANGHI, J.
January 31, 2008
P.K. BABBAR/aj

C.M. (M) No.50/2005

Page 15 of 15

